International Journal of Education and Development using Information and Communication Technology 
(IJEDICT), 2015, Vol. 11, Issue 2, pp. 168-183 
	  
Evaluation of elearning usage in South African universities: A critical 
review 
 
Emily Bagarukayo 
Makerere University, Uganda 
 
Billy Kalema 
Tshwane University of Technology, South Africa 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Although eLearning is the use of technology for teaching, learning and assessment, there is no 
common approach to it across South African Higher Education Institutions. There is therefore a 
concern that the full potential of eLearning approach is not utilised. This paper examines the 
nature and the extent of eLearning activities in South African (SA) universities. The research 
method employed in this paper was informed by a literature review; sources from the last decade 
include journals, conferences, books and websites. The findings show that the level of eLearning 
usage and adoption varies in different universities due to several challenges such as those of 
technology and institutions. We give an overview of studies conducted in eLearning in SA 
universities, highlighting challenges and best practices. We recommend management 
involvement of faculties in policy decisions and investment in technological innovations to 
address these challenges issues.  
 
Keywords: eLearning, eLearning Challenges, Learning Management Software, Social Software 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Learning is a process where learners’ interaction with materials, peers and instructors results in 
change in behaviour and thinking. Learning 2.0 is the concept of delivering educational activities 
using web tools which create a new kind of a participatory medium to encourage multiple learning 
types, including social learning (Hamid et al., 2009). Learning 2.0 utilises web tools, social 
networking, collaboration and self directed learning. Effective learning should improve on the 
quality of learning experience, be learner centred, be active, lead to knowledge construction and 
change learners’ knowledge, attitudes, perceptions and skills. Educators need to prepare learners 
for future employment by putting theory into practice. Mlitwa (2006) notes that the quality of 
teaching and learning depends on methods, content, learner and educator, and, therefore, 
technology cannot correct these factors if they are poor.  
 
 
eLearning Implementation in Higher Education Institutions  
 
In the 1990s, e-learning, that is, learning facilitated online through network technologies emerged 
across South African HEI (Ravjee, 2007). In SA context, e-learning practices appear with new 
vocabulary, policies and structures, and budgets. eLearning is an ICT-enhanced practice in 
universities ranging from e-mail provision, online journals, and networked libraries, to  
development of creative software solutions for information management tasks in teaching, 
research and administrative systems. Moll et al. (2007) defined e-Learning as ‘flexible learning 
using ICT resources, tools and applications, focusing on accessing information, interaction 
among teachers, learners, and the online environment collaborative learning, and  production of 

eLearning	  usage	  in	  South	  African	  universities	  	  	  	      169 
	  
materials, resources and learning experiences’. eLearning is the use of technological 
interventions for teaching, learning and assessment (Mlitwa & Van Belle, 2011), enabling learners 
to improve problem-solving skills and empowers educators to disseminate and impart knowledge 
effectively. Millham et al. (2014) say eLearning is essential for the improvement of learners’ 
performance, engagement, self- regulation, flexibility, interest and motivation. It promotes active 
participation and self-regulated learning, which enables construction, learning-pace adjustment 
and gives desired learning outcomes. 
 
 
The Historical Background of eLearning Policies and Activities 
 
After independency, South Africa explicitly formulated education policies for promoting access to 
educational opportunities for previously disadvantaged groups (Dumbrajs et al., 2013). Since 
1994, education reformation has been a priority to promote equality among all races. Progress 
has been made in education legislation, policy development, curriculum reform and the 
implementation of new modes of education delivery; however challenges like student outcomes 
and labour market relevance exist. The new National Curriculum Statement (NCS) emphasizes a 
learner-centred, outcomes-based education approach. In the GET band (grades 1-9), “subjects” 
have been replaced with “learning areas” integrated across traditional disciplinary boundaries. 
The curriculum was subsequently rewritten in plainer language, with more emphasis given to 
basic skills, content knowledge and logical grade progression. The inception of Curriculum 2005 
introduced changes in the SA school system and therefore retraining teachers is needed to 
prepare them for the newly introduced technology subject. The aim of reformed policies was to 
teach curricula based on learners’ own socio-economic environment and equip them with skills 
that can be applied in real life situations (Dumbrajs et al., 2013). Other policies included the 
Revised National Curricula Statements and Curricula Assessment and Policy Statements, which 
indicate a period of rapid transformation and democratization. New education policies in SA 
include indigenous knowledge in the curricula but are not prescriptive (Dumbrajs et al., 2013). 
The national Department of Education, published its White Paper on E-Education in 2004 and 
called together a ‘think-tank’ in 2006 based on an overview of research and delivery needs 
related to the ‘roll-out’ of e-Learning in schools (Moll et al., 2007).Therefore teachers should 
explicitly provide opportunities for learners to learn effectively and this can be done by the use of 
Information and Communications Technologies (ICTs) like eLearning.  
 
Using ICTs for education leads to social transformation and improves skills needs for a country 
(Jaffer et al., 2007). Universities can remain competitive by using innovative technologies in 
teaching and learning to improve the quality of activities and attract new learners (Mlitwa, 2006). 
The SA National plan for Higher Education emphasizes that University activities develop an 
information society, through technology use, for knowledge advancement to improve education 
and support the new education system. Therefore, there was need for integration of ICTs in SA 
Universities to compete globally, be innovative and address the learning styles and preferences 
of digital natives longing to learn in an active, authentic learning environment.  
 
In 2001 Prensky invented the term ‘digital natives’ to refer to the new generation of learners who 
have grown up surrounded by technology and views them as ‘‘native speakers of technology, 
fluent in the digital language of computers, video games, and the Internet” (Thinyane, 2010). 
Digital natives are people between 18 and 24 years who were born into a digital world and find 
their way easily with computers, internet, video games, smart phones, tablets and interact via 
social media more than anyone else and rapidly adapt to new technologies (Hoijtink, 2015). The 
author further predicts 48.4 million smart phone users, 35.3 million mobile internet subscriptions 
and 5.1 million activated tablet devices, while 2.1 million households would have fixed internet 
subscriptions in South Africa in 2018. South Africa had traditionally copied western trends, but the 
influence of Asian countries is seen in the relationship between online shopping and social media 

170   IJEDICT 
 
(Hoijtink, 2015). It is impossible for digital natives to learn in the same way as digital immigrants 
(not born into the digital world but have adapted to technology) did, because they speak different 
languages and have different brains (Thinyane, 2010). Digital Natives ways of thinking and 
learning include receiving information really fast, liking to parallel process, multi-task, prefer  
games to ‘serious’  work’, graphics and random access, function best when networked and thrive 
on instant gratification and frequent rewards. Digital Immigrants think ‘slowly, step-by-step, one 
thing at a time, individually, and seriously’ and are encouraged to learn to use digital media, and 
recommends that education systems be adapted to the way of thinking of Digital Natives. New 
forms of learning are providing evidence of the dramatic social change through digitisation, like 
eLearning, game-based learning, webinars and Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs). 
Therefore since eLearning approach transforms learning and teaching, it was therefore ideal for 
learner needs, preferences and requirements. 
 
eLearning promotes learner-centred learning and enhances activities that promote collaboration, 
communication and interaction, and gives learners better experience and education effect (Du et 
al., 2013) and enables learners to apply knowledge in novel situations through case studies, role 
playing and simulations. Digital natives may be resistant to traditional teaching and learning 
methods (Bosch, 2009) because they are engrossed with technology and, therefore, eLearning is 
the way forward for today’s universities. Brown & Czerniewicz carried out a study on how and to 
what extent ICTs were used in teaching and learning in HEIs in Western Cape Province of SA 
and only 2.15% learners never or rarely used a computer to undertake any of the 18 computer-
based learning activities; therefore learners in SA Africa may have similar studies experience at 
university to other learners around the world (Thinyane, 2010).  
 
Education leads to social transformation, hence the aim of the SA government being to achieve 
equitable access to Higher Education for previously disadvantaged learners with diverse racial, 
social and educational backgrounds (Jaffer et al., 2007). Macgregor (2008) says the use of 
educational technologies, like eLearning in SA, started in 2002. ICTs are used for teaching and 
learning, in one way or another, though universities differ in levels of institutional support, funding, 
uptake and staffing. There is increased interest in eLearning services and platforms since the SA 
curriculum restructuring was proposed in 2003. According to Jaffer et al. (2007), pedagogy, 
curriculum, assessment and organization lead to improvement in the educational process. 
Therefore, educators need to invest in these aspects for improved learning, better retention and 
improved grades. 
 
Venter et al. (2012) say learners in SA universities highly value contact with instructors and 
colleagues via electronic media. They appreciate the use of Educational Technologies (ETs) to 
increase learning interest and motivation. Mlitwa (2006) describes eLearning as a Social 
Technical Network (STN), since it includes technologies for construction and collaboration by 
users. Through learning management systems (LMS), eLearning qualifies as an STN that 
incorporates computer, network, applications, learning materials, learners, educators and 
mediators. 
 
This study aims to evaluate the impact of usage of LMS and social software in SA universities. 
We discuss challenges with eLearning implementation and look at the adoption and usage at 
different institutions, and then we give recommendations for institutions to address the issues 
identified. 
 
 
Challenges of eLearning Implementation in South Africa 
 
In general, SA learners have challenges which include diverse backgrounds, languages and race; 
they are divided between wealth, and have infrastructure shortages, access issues, shortage of 

eLearning	  usage	  in	  South	  African	  universities	  	  	  	      171 
	  
skilled instructor, managers’ jobs loss misconceptions and instructor difficulty to create content. 
Teaching strategies are hard to employ and it is hard to gain insights into learner difficulties, 
especially in large classes. Therefore learners, especially those from poor backgrounds, may lag 
behind. The educational challenges demand a mixed approach like blended learning that is 
innovative to address problems of class and cultural diversity, learners’ prior learning experience, 
increased education demand and changing learning needs. The SA post-apartheid policy 
documents advocate for equal opportunities in education sector; however, practice varies from 
policy (Rohleder et al., 2008). The eLearning approach provides equal opportunities, which is the 
biggest challenge in SA. Brown et al. (2008) recommend collaboration, joint research projects 
and sharing of good practice and approach to address the challenges. In the next section, we 
discuss the implementation of LMSs and social software at different universities in SA. 
 
 
Table 1: Challenges of eLearning adoption in SA 
 
Author(s) 
Challenges  
Jaffer et al. (2007) 
varying learner academic preparedness; large classes; multilingualism 
in 1st language context; inadequate curriculum design; diversity in 
(school) background; and academic ability 
MacGregor (2008) 
low bandwidth and unequal access 
Brown et al. (2008) 
range of organisational contexts; practices and cultures; infrastructural 
constraints — proportion of internet users to PCs, bandwidth, slow and 
internet costs; demographic divides, cell phone subscription LMS 
instability; lack of use of interactive web potential; access inequality; 
negative eLearning perceptions; no management support; lack of time 
and resources; and oversubscribed internet systems that limit 
applications use 
Mlitwa & Van Belle 
(2011) 
inadequate technical support; limited infrastructure capacity; network 
capacity; inadequate coordination and limited technological support; 
technology instability; resistance to change; tedious administrator 
processes; access issues; literacy limitations; institutions users with 
troubled network systems; and poor user support 
Venter et al. (2012) 
scarce resources; educational inequalities; technology access 
shortage; low throughput rates; technological cost; satisfaction & 
infrastructure; lecturer efforts; graduate competencies; business 
strategy shortages; learners’ frustration with e-Learning; underutilised 
systems; bandwidth cost of high speed internet; and user penetration 
Isabirye & Dlodlo 
(2014) 
no institutional support; non-integration of eLearning business strategy; 
no eLearning culture; exclusion of academia from eLearning 
development programmes; instructor attitudes; technological 
challenges; lack of pedagogical strategies; cost and quality; lack of 
university policy, training, motivation, incentive; under preparedness; no 
facilitating conditions; logistical issues, lack of management; and ICT 
support 
OERAfrica (2014) 
weak ICT skills; lack of resources; low computer and internet access  
 
 
From the table we note several similar challenges mainly, infrastructural constraints, demographic 
divides, staffing issues, organisational issues, learner issues, pedagogical issues. However some 
institutions have unique challenges like lack of time and resources, inadequate curriculum design, 
training, shortage of ICT skills. and user penetration.  
	  

172   IJEDICT 
 
STATE OF ART AND PRACTICE 
 
 
Learning Management Systems Usage at SA Universities  
 
The University of Pretoria (UP) was among the first universities to take up eLearning in 1998 with 
the WebCT LMS after running long-distance programmes from 1995 using video conferencing, 
broadcasting, multimedia, web-based courses. According to OERAfrica (2014), UP has over 
48,000 campus-based learners and over 24,000 off-campus part-time and distance learners. The 
Department of Telematics Learning and Education Innovation assists academic instructor in 
learning design activities. 
 
At the University of South Africa (UNISA), the instructor use eLearning to distribute resources and 
facilitate interaction and use mobile technology for learners’ communication. Over 200,000 active 
learners are enrolled on ‘myunisa’ platform (OERAfrica, 2014), which uses the Open Source 
Software (OSS) Sakai platform, customised for user needs for administrative functions, academic 
collaboration and tuition related interaction (Venter et al., 2012). Of the 96% of learners that 
accessed the system, 13% were active in discussions, 64% were frequent users, 23% were 
occasional users and 10% were infrequent users. The platform was mainly used for 
administrative purposes as passive observers, hence it is not fully utilised to its potential. There is 
a need to increase active learners to improve learning. 
 
The University of Cape Town (UCT) initially used WebCT and Moodle, developed by OSS Vula 
and customised by Sakai in 2006, currently used by 25,000 learners and instructor of the 
University of SA and North West University. This LMS supports teaching by notes and 
announcement distribution, and is used as a transfer medium, though not for construction. 
Courses are designed using eLearning and simulations. The LMS-adoption decision-making 
process involved educators who have the freedom to use proprietary, home-grown systems or 
none. Educators have no time to engage the system and pedagogy (Mlitwa, 2006). Designers 
keep the interfaces simple, the helpdesk service is professional and efficient, tedious 
administration tasks are eliminated, and lecturer assistants (Mlitwa & Van Belle, 2011) make use 
and adoption easy. The Science instructor lags behind due to instructors being unwilling to use 
the system, system usage is not promoted or supported, the computers are in poor working 
condition, there are no relevant software programs and no helpful lab instructor. The high 
turnover of the LMS was due to compatibility issues. 
 
At the University of Stellenbosch (US) and Cape Peninsula University of Technology (CPUT), a 
proprietary LMS WebCT is used as a learning transfer medium (Mlitwa, 2006). At US, the system 
was adopted without consultation with academics and, therefore, there is minimal instructor 
engagement. There is a widespread usage of the LMS at US because of their compulsory intake 
clause at US. CPUT lacks a policy or forum for users to select the LMS.  
 
At the University of Western Cape (UWC), a home-grown and developed OSS KEWL is used. It 
lacks full interactive engagement between social and technical factors because academics do not 
understand the potential benefits and are resistant to change (Mlitwa, 2006), which challenges 
LMS adoption and usage.  
 
At Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University (NMMU), the SharePoint 10 content and document 
management system is used to avail courses for sharing and collaboration in blended learning 
environments (Ssekakuubo et al., 2011).The platform is less flexible with limited interactivity 
options and was replaced by Moodle. 
 
The University of Johannesburg (UJ) has over 45,000 full-time, part-time, face-to-face learners 
spread across seven campuses (OERAfrica, 2014). It uses a commercial LMS to supplement 

eLearning	  usage	  in	  South	  African	  universities	  	  	  	      173 
	  
course delivery, with extra support to learners in large classes with online materials. Instructors 
are offered support in learning design, which makes the usage of the system easy.  
 
Since 2010, the University of Kwazul Natal (UKZN) has been using the Moodle platform for 
teaching and learning for instructor and learners (Sibanda & Donnelly, 2014). Instructors use the 
platform to upload notes and deliver assignments, announcements, discussion forums and other 
interactive exercises. There is no additional learner support which makes system usage and 
adoption challenging.  
 
At Tshwane University of Technology (TUT), ‘electronic campus’ was the initial LMS in 2011. It 
was replaced by Blackboard (MyTutor), a content repository where instructors upload notes, 
assignments and grades. TUT has systems for online video tutorials access, TUT4life for learners 
for access to TUT mail and wireless internet, one for checking grades and an instructor portal for 
instructor-related information.  
 
 
Studies On LMS Adoption And Usage At Universities 
 
At the Western Cape Universities, Mlitwa (2006) noted the eLearning potential to unfold as a true 
socio-technical network was not fully realised and the technical aspect was not engaged at a 
socio-technical agency basis. The technology and organisational transformations relationship is 
minimal. The frequency of media use in Science, Engineering and Health disciplines was higher 
(Brown et al., 2008).  
 
Several UCT projects had positive results with the intervention of Educational Technologies 
(ETs). A computer tutorial was more effective in the understanding of mathematical literacy skills, 
concepts and better retention (Jaffer et al., 2007). Interactive spreadsheets were effective 
teaching tools because they focused on the subject, not the procedural issues, and learners’ 
article quality improved due to online feedback. Computer-assisted marking technologies 
provided feedback, thereby solving large and diverse class problems and saving instructors their 
time due to online marking and the ability to capture results electronically. Instructors had access 
to learners’ performance and they found immediate feedback useful. ETs solved some issues that 
were hard to solve with face-to-face (f2f) methods. Gaps identified in research included how ETs 
can address education challenges in SA, where ETs are appropriate and how they are used in a 
given situation.  
 
According to Jaffer et al. (2007), it is difficult for learners to understand theory-driven courses due 
to limited experience and practical knowledge. Simulations were used to provide UCT learners 
with insights into practical processes, which provided an authentic learning environment. The 
focus was on key learning aspects and linking theory to practice. An ET was used to impact 
curricula design, providing learners with simulations and role playing experiences — things that 
are difficult to provide in f2f environments. Real-world experiences helped bring theory into 
practice to address some challenges. Future challenges remain in identifying and conceptualising 
ways that ETs can contribute to learning experiences, curriculum and pedagogical designs. 
 
SA is a divided society by race, wealth, background, and identity crisis; therefore, individuals 
need to create their identity. Rohleder et al. (2008) studied learners at UWC and US, the learners 
state that creation of virtual communities prepared them for diverse society.  
 
The learners gave positive feedback and will repeat the collaboration because of the learning and 
the personal growth opportunity. Discussion forums and chat rooms in the LMS promoted 
flexibility, creativity, collaboration, communication and interaction, enhancing the learning 
process. As benefits of using eLearning medium, learners had rewarding and enriching personal 

174   IJEDICT 
 
experience and attributed instant accessibility to information and their facilitators. Learners 
enjoyed working collaboratively within diverse groups of race and social economic backgrounds. 
Learners advocated for blended learning because they felt f2f sessions are important, too. The 
question of how to create something more than a superficial community of practice in a real world 
context remains.  
 
Mlitwa & Van Belle (2011) say subjective personal perceptions influenced different LMS uptake 
by the 21 instructors at UWC, UCT, US and CPUT in Western Cape Province interviewed over a 
two-year period. They perceived eLearning as a content repository and administration tool for 
assignment submission and management, and easing communication, not for learning or 
teaching as a primary goal. 
 
Instructors are worried about their roles being replaced and learners dodging class. The LMS 
pedagogical role is hardly recognised because educators cannot differentiate between LMS and 
eLearning; hence, the opportunity to address learning styles and teaching paradigms is 
unutilised. The Activity Analysis and Development (ActAD) framework and concrete empirical 
findings as comparative data for eLearning research and LMS adoption will be used in the future.  
 
Mohamed & Peerbhay (2012) say dental learners were positive about the use of eLearning at 
UWC. Based on perceptions, learners said more advanced learning was encouraged, it is a good 
supplement to instructors, it broadens knowledge base and they found the information to be 
relevant, informative and helpful. The experience and information gave them a guide for studying 
and preparing for theory and practical exams. However, the LMS access challenges included 
computer shortages, inappropriate software versions, computer failures, viruses, no internet 
access, time shortages due to workload, and slow internet connections which led to download 
and website problems. They recommend faster internet connectivity because a shortage of 
resources causes negative attitudes and a negative impact on engagement with online resources. 
They recommend eLearning to encourage active learning and the next implementation phase to 
include an interactive component of self-assessment and discussion boards, as an incentive for 
more active engagement. The learner-centred approach uses a management system for 
administrative issues, offering learners personal tools for construction, presentation, reflection, 
collaboration, etc., and facilitating networks between learners within the same course and others 
in the field. 
 
According to Millham et al. (2014), self-regulating eLearning as an intervention for poor results in 
science subjects leads to improved learners’ grades. It provides multimedia and simulation 
materials, is self-paced, self-regulated, learner-led and encourages knowledge construction, 
which is more effective than the f2f approach. Self-regulated learning encourages construction, 
which leads to better performance in science subjects. The eLearning intervention shows positive 
results, especially for high-potential learners, amidst challenges of equipment issues and lack of 
prior basic IT skills. Issues of incomplete marks made a full detailed analysis of grade 
performance difficult and provided no correlation between assessment scores with relevant 
statistical information.  
 
Sibanda & Donnelly (2014) determined the impact of eLearning on performance, showing that 
learners’ performances increased after the introduction of online learning as years progressed 
and learners became academically-engaged as they became more familiar with the online 
learning platform. Younger learners quickly adapted and became engaged, which improved 
performance.  
 
 
	  
 

eLearning	  usage	  in	  South	  African	  universities	  	  	  	      175 
	  
SOCIAL SOFTWARE AS A LEARNING TOOL IN SOUTH AFRICA 
 
Learning is a social process and, therefore, Social Presence (SP) is essential as a predictor of 
perceived learning and promotes a sense of community in online courses (Brady et al., 2010). SP 
leads to a decrease in feelings of isolation and encourages learner interaction and participation. 
The relationship between SP and online participation is that learners with more SP are more 
involved and engaged in online conversions.  
 
Social Software (SS), Web 2.0, Social Media (SM) or social web technologies are networked 
tools or technologies that emphasize the social aspects of the internet as a channel for 
communication, interaction, collaboration and creative expression (Dabbagha & Kitsantasb, 
2012). Educational Social Software is SS designed for educational purposes. The elements of 
Web 2.0 technologies — including blogs, wikis, podcasts, RSS feeds, social networking sites 
(SNSs), social bookmarking sites, instant messaging, and virtual office applications — provide 
users with easy-to-produce web content and interaction (Al-Zoube & El-Seoud, 2009). Web 2.0 
tools with potential apps for teaching and learning include Facebook, Wikis, Delicious, Podcasts, 
and YouTube. SNSs include Twitter, Facebook, Flickr, Myspace and Friendster, with core 
features of interaction, collaboration and the social aspect. The uses of SNSs include developing 
literacy skills, communication skills, e-portfolios, communities of practice and e-safety learning. 
Searching and retrieving information may have led to a learning styles shift, to more interactive 
environments and more hands-on inquiry-based approaches (Bosch, 2009). Web-based learning 
leads to the availability of the learning content. 
 
SS facilitates self-governed, problem-based and collaborative activities by supplying learners with 
personal tools for independent construction and engagement in social networks (Dalsgaard, 
2014). SS tools enable independent work, and actively facilitate relationships between 
collaborating learners and instructor. SS tools support the flexibility of open-ended activities, 
unlike an integrated LMS; they include personal tools owned and controlled by learners and used 
for construction and reflection, and tools for navigating the web to develop understanding and 
solve problems, which lead to lifelong learning using 'learning networks’ for life. SM is part of a 
daily communication network; therefore, higher education needs to accommodate SM platforms 
to ensure learners are prepared as skilled digital citizens (Freeman, 2014). SM enhances 
learning, engagement, User Generated Content, sharing of information and content, ICT skills, 
learner empowerment and activities that foster knowledge construction; hence, SM is effective for 
learning. Learners should be facilitated to engage in different networks to support eLearning 
activities, which lead to accessing more resources through friends, instructor and researchers. SS 
encourages learners to develop individual networks for relationships based on specific interests 
and needs. Learning and network are related and learners should be connected. A learning 
network leads to a continuous lifelong process, which leads to continuous learning due to SNS-
participation. 
 
Facebook has stronger roots in the academic community, since it was developed as university 
project. In 2007, the Facebook version of the Blackboard LMS was implemented with new course 
feed application, providing users with course newsfeed (Bosch, 2009). In 2008, it was phased 
out, with Facebook calling on developers to build other educational platforms. 
 
According to Dalsgaard (2014), an LMS is for improving learning and administration purposes, 
though the impact on pedagogy is limited. Unlike an LMS, SS tools support the active process of 
construction and strengthen learners’ relations with others and the tools, which promotes 
collaboration as a basis for discussion. The problems are the basis of learners’ activities in a 
constructive learning environment, and different tools and resources support both individual and 
collaborative problem-solving processes. Since the learning process focal point is self-governed 
by learners through problem-solving activities, it is not possible to envisage learner activities. 

176   IJEDICT 
 
Open-ended learning environments for multiple possibilities for activities are encouraged. SS 
tools that support construction, presentation, reflection, collaboration and promote finding people 
and resources for problem solving are needed. In the future, development of educational SS 
tools, like personal tools and social networks, are needed to support learning activities for 
organizing eLearning beyond a single course and institution.  
 
Dalsgaard (2014) recommends separate tools for individual learner needs and not integrated 
tools like in an LMS. Unlike an LMS, learners use networking beyond a specific course period for 
solving future problems. Personalisation (personal tools and social networking) enables learners 
to look for resources and people to help in the problem-solving process. In this learner-centred 
approach, an e-learning course is initiated by the formulation of problems for learners’ self-
governed work. The learning process develops through self-governed learners’ work, manifested 
in personal tools which are unique for each learner, since they get different materials depending 
on their social network. Personal Learning Environments (PLEs) are effective for integrating 
formal and informal learning in the Higher Education context and address learners’ control issues 
and personalisation effectively (Dabbagh & Kitsantas, 2011). PLEs consist of SM tools which 
promote individual learning where learners maintain the learning space to facilitate their own 
learning activities and peer connections. A three-level pedagogical framework for using social 
media to support self-regulated learning in PLEs — including personal information management, 
social interaction and collaboration, and information aggregation and management — was 
developed. It suggests that learners become motivated and empowered to create effective and 
sustainable PLEs to achieve desired learning outcomes and enrich learning experiences as they 
engage in self-oriented feedback system with instructor and peers. However, this framework has 
not been tested empirically and should be verified in the future. 
 
According to Al-Zoube & El-Seoud (2009), SS provides users with a platform to build social 
applications and enhance interactive communication and collaboration with resource sharing. SS 
has created an impact on education and has been adopted to meet emerging needs since it 
promotes personalisation, flexibility, openness, problem solving, building connections and 
collaboration. SNSs can act as pedagogical agents like Problem-Based Learning — whereby 
learners identify people and resources relevant for problem solving — to add to the social 
network because information spreads fast and has the potential for networked learning. SS can 
be used to support a social constructivist approach to eLearning. Since SNSs are free, educators 
should integrate them into their personal lives and their academics.  
 
Al-Zoube and El-Seoud (2009) presented an eLearning system that uses SS and SNSs to 
provide learners with an integrated, comprehensive and feature-rich environment for accessing 
applications, sharing documents, results and other objects, and connecting with instructor and 
learners. The learner feedback suggests that the SNS approach provides a much better user 
experience than with an LMS. In the future, the authors plan to enable web server interaction with 
Open Social applications to provide users with personalized materials and quizzes. 
 
Since the SNS features promote interaction and collaboration, they should be integrated into 
LMSs for academic purposes to make the learning exciting and improve on the learning interest 
and motivation (Bosch, 2009). Training and support for SNS-use from institutions and instructor is 
highly recommended. Integration and social networking technology use is a solution to the 
distance learning problem of no interaction (Brady et al., 2010). A study to determine SNS users 
and applications used to enhance these tools academically showed that learners use SNS the 
most (96.7%), especially digital natives (90%) and digital immigrants (67%). Facebook was the 
greatest host (81%), followed by Twitter (30%), LinkedIn (5%) and Myspace (4%) (Rinco & 
Sandoval, 2014). Learners say social networks have led to a change in pedagogy and teaching 
methods, since they encourage information-sharing which promotes research and academia, and 
allows for quick knowledge enrichment.  

eLearning	  usage	  in	  South	  African	  universities	  	  	  	      177 
	  
 
Unlike a LMS, SNSs provide immediate feedback through such features as comments. According 
to Bosch (2009), universities should change their LMS’s focus from content delivery to interaction, 
collaboration and communication between instructor and learners. The SNS features can be 
integrated into existing LMSs without building new systems — for example, Elgg and Mahara 
have inbuilt SNS features to support learning. UCT learners are more engaged with Facebook, as 
compared to the Vula LMS (Bosch, 2009). A UCT lecturer said it was quicker to ‘talk’ to learners 
on Facebook than finding them in class if she wanted to communicate. The Facebook functions 
for UCT learners include social networking, seeking peer support, community building on 
campus, learner activism, general communication, sharing information and maintaining group and 
personal communication on public spaces. The learners accessed instructors in formal 
environments with less pressure and felt more comfortable in the shared space. Learners asked 
questions they feared to ask in class, felt instructors were more approachable after online 
interactions and indicated the material to cover prior to the lecture, which led to class time spent 
effectively. Facebook benefits learners with low self-esteem and low life satisfaction and cannot 
be ignored as a potential educational tool because of its efficient ways to teach large classes, like 
through groups discussions (Bosch, 2009).  
 
As noted by Cloete et al. (2009), the benefits of SNSs like Facebook include a higher level of 
engagement, digital literacy skills, integration in learners’ daily practices, the potential to make 
identity information more relevant during class discussions, adding a ‘social’ peer to peer 
component and managing alumni through the group. Facebook creates an online academic 
community by linking learners and instructor, thereby breaking barriers and providing more 
immediate responses. The instructors highlighted the promotion of critical thinking and improved 
24/7 access to resources as SNS advantages. The learners sited companionship, information 
access, emotional and material support, the opportunity to know their instructors better, 
expanding social research, more confidence, opportunities to develop peer relationships and 
instructors, and more self-disclosure as benefits. While 64.4% of instructors at UP thought 
Facebook can be an academic learning tool, only 24.4% had applied SNSs to teach (Cloete et al., 
2009).  
 
Brady et al. (2010) surveyed graduate distance learners’ attitudes to the Education-based SNS 
online tool Ning for teaching and learning to determine the educational benefits. The discussion 
tool was used for sharing ideas and deliberating the topics covered. Key themes in the learner 
responses were communication, collaboration, reflection and comprehension, convenience and 
comfort, and benefits and draw backs of the tool. Based on the learner perceptions, Ning was 
better than f2f in terms of collaboration, time efficiency and diverse viewpoints. The learners 
highlighted the benefits of increased levels of communication and collaboration to deepen the 
levels of reflections. The instructors reported positive effects on learner engagement and content 
sharing. Learners created a forum based on their personal needs, which increased individual 
collaboration, personalization and learning ownership. Learners were more familiar with 
Facebook and preferred it for discussions; therefore, it is important to find learners in their space. 
Drawbacks reported include time shortage and access issues. This study did not explore how 
education-based SNSs can be most effectively used to support and enhance learning. 
 
According to Du et al. (2013), LMSs are a traditional form of eLearning, designed for course 
management and they have limited impact on pedagogy, lack personalised control for learners 
and offer limited interaction and collaboration between learners, educators and courses. 
Therefore, they are not competent for supporting eLearning in a new era which views learning as 
a self-governed, problem-based and collaborative social process. Learners’ proficiency in cutting 
edge technologies required by employers can be promoted by SM use. SS moves academic 
activities to the public sphere and opens the academic environment to public space (Rodriguez, 
2011). The incorporation of SM and User Generated Content (UGC) into the public space for 

178   IJEDICT 
 
teaching and learning in Higher Education is needed. Learners’ active participation, a form of 
knowledge creation, is encouraged and changes the information flow from unidirectional to 
bidirectional. 
 
Instructors integrated SM with Blackboard LMS to understand the potential for teaching context, 
expectations, experiences and pedagogical choices. Instructors reported flexibility and increased 
learner involvement in finding resources, discussing content and sharing in knowledge 
construction (Freeman, 2014). There was a close connection between instructor pedagogical 
values and the perceived potential of SM technologies that drew instructor to the appropriate 
technology from the personal/private to public or pedagogical technology users. The instructor’s 
personal experiences on SM influenced their approaches to integrate tools into pedagogical 
practices after discovering compatibility between SM collaborative strengths and pedagogical 
values. In the future, there is a need to explore the domestication of SM in higher education 
classrooms. 
 
There is limited or no f2f interactions in distance learning, which makes building Communities of 
Practice (CP) and fostering Social Presence a challenge. Technologies in SNS aid discussion 
and create intimacy among online learners by building community in socially- and educationally-
constructed network. SNSs actively extend learning beyond the class, which is important for 
distance learners. Distance learning courses are more successful when they develop CPs which 
enhances deep learning. Deep learning includes higher order thinking, reflective learning and 
integrative learning, which leads to higher scores in education, and the practical components lead 
to social development (Sibanda and Donnelly, 2014). LMSs are more focused and lack the 
personal touch and networking capacity that SNSs offer. SNSs are user-centred, not class-
centred, and have the potential to increase learner engagement and improve the learning 
process.  
 
The perceptions and learning experiences of learners from the University of Stellenbosch (in 
South Africa) and the University of Alabama (in the United States), both using the Blackboard 
LMS, were determined (Hough and Neuland, 2014). The learners identified acquiring problem-
solving and decision-making skills as the biggest benefits of using the tool and added value to 
their business process management and communication skills. These positive results were 
attributed to the extensive involvement and experience with cases, which simulated real-world 
business experiences. The learners claim ICTs added value to studies because they created 
online profiles on web 2.0 sites. South African learners experienced a higher value and more 
positive experience than their United States counterparts because of proximity, no direct on-
campus interaction with instructors, and employment. They recommend optimal use of ICTs to 
enhance learning because learners choose Higher Education Institutions based on delivery 
expectations, so curricula and learning experiences must remain relevant and market-related. 
UNISA learners use SNSs to connect with fellow learners and are strongly in support of 
Facebook (Hough and Neuland, 2014). Educators need to tap into SNSs for an attitude change 
and to improve motivation and learning interest by integrating SNS features into the LMSs for 
better learning processes. 
 
The learners felt eLearning tools held great potential to transform education through collaboration 
and increased engagement, and they advised instructor to facilitate this environment. Twitter 
learners had a significantly greater increase in engagement and Grade Point Average (Junco et 
al., 2010). Hamid et al. (2009) highlights the main challenge as pedagogically appropriating and 
repurposing social technology for the Online Social Networking (OSN) used by digital natives. 
There is need to adjust pedagogical models to address digital learners with important OSN 
activities that include content generating and sharing, interacting and collaboratively sharing.  
 
 

eLearning	  usage	  in	  South	  African	  universities	  	  	  	      179 
	  
DISCUSSION, RECOMMENDATIONS AND CONCLUSION  
 
From the literature reviewed and the challenges discussed, we recommend the following for 
successful eLearning implementation. 
 
 
Training and Support in ICT, Content Creation Skills and Policy  
 
We note instructor and learners’ difficulty in using the LMS due to inadequate ICT skills. There is 
a need for ICT personnel support at institutions. The issue of diverse languages can be 
addressed by creating and sharing local, customised content which improves learning because 
the learners study better in their first language. Training users in content creation and ICT skills 
enables the development of localised content for teaching and learning. There is a need to 
develop educational software tools to support learning activities, like Weblogs to promote 
collaboration and provide a basis for discussion. If a learner posts his/her view, it attracts 
feedback and becomes collaborative. An SNS platform differs from an LMS discussion forum 
because group views matter. Collaboration between content, pedagogy and technology is 
important for successful eLearning.  
 
There is a need for institutional leadership, policy, and awareness programs to encourage use to 
improve institutional policy and delivery performance at HEIs. 
 
 
Cost and Technology Aspects 
 
Most debates concentrate on cost and proprietary vs OSS issues, and not technical aspects, 
during the LMS-adoption decision making (Mlitwa, 2006). Technological aspects should be 
discussed for successful implementation. The cost is curbed using free and customisable OSS to 
institutional and academic needs. 
 
 
Content Access to Diverse Population 
 
The eLearning approach is recommended for learners from diverse cultures, races and 
languages by availing content accessible anywhere. Over the years, SA has had increased 
access to mobile phones compared to computers (Bosch, 2009; Brown et al., 2008). Brown et al. 
(2008) says 2 out of 14 eLearning managers testified to using mobile technologies for education. 
An opportunity for increased access to content and technology is exploiting mobile-learning 
platforms, like mobile apps using SM. Learners can access resources and networks using mobile 
phones at their convenience to keep engaged and improve learning. With SNSs, content is 
accessed beyond institutional borders; for example, the MIT Open Course Ware in the United 
States and the Open Educational Resources provide equal content access to diverse populations 
for equal opportunities.  
 
 
Large Class Sizes 
 
Educational technologies can address large class numbers by providing accessible content 
regardless of location; they can address diverse learners by promoting Personalised learning and 
PLEs. SNSs like Facebook allow group creation for academic purposes, which enable easier 
management of large classes.  
 
 

180   IJEDICT 
 
Curriculum Review  
 
There is criticism of the f2f approach that it fails to develop the Higher Order Cognitive Skills  
necessary for work environments (Bagarukayo et al., 2012). A change in curriculum to 
incorporate practical pedagogy that promotes HOCS for problem solving, critical thinking and 
decision making is recommended. eLearning and SNSs provide the best platforms for practical 
skills and HOCS, and should be embraced. 
 
 
Infrastructural and Technical Issues 
 
Due to infrastructure issues, the use of web 2.0 technologies may be difficult in the developing 
world. Therefore, universities need to improve their technology infrastructure by seeking funding 
from Governments and others to procure adequate infrastructure. 
 
 
Instructor Motivation and Job Security  
 
There is a need for instructor motivation and incentives for content creation for easy LMS-use. 
The instructor that develop and upload content can be a given bonus to motivate others; they 
should be sensitized of the eLearning benefits for adoption and must be assured of job safety and 
relevance as facilitators. 
 
 
Engaged Learners and Instructor 
 
Some universities had few active users; this needs to increase to improve grades and increase 
retention. Instructor should motivate learners to increase their engagement in the online learning 
environments. The learners are engaged in SNSs; hence, educators need to find them in their 
space for effective, more active and engaged learning. Instructor should be involved in the LMS 
development and acquisition in order to own the technology and use it optimally. The learners’ 
interest and motivation is increased by integrating SNSs in LMSs. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
We discussed eLearning usage and implementation, identified challenges and made 
recommendations. There is a paucity of research on the use of Social Software for academic 
purposes in Africa as compared to developed world. We recommend the SS approach to promote 
learning activities that improve the learning process. According to the Technology Adoption Model 
(Venter et al., 2012), system adoption is influenced by attitudes, perceived ease-of-use, 
perceived usefulness and user behavioural intentions. Therefore, institutions should ensure that 
these factors are positive for the successful adoption of eLearning. In the future, we will survey 
instructor at TUT and other SA institutions to measure the improvement in technology usage. We 
will experiment with social software as a tool for learning to determine how it influences learning 
at SA institutions.  
 
	  
 

eLearning	  usage	  in	  South	  African	  universities	  	  	  	      181 
	  
REFERENCES  
	  
Al-Zoube, M. & El-Seoud, S. (2009). Using Social Networking Sites as a Platform for E-Learning. 
Conference ICL2009 Villach, Austria, 193-199. 
 
Bagarukayo, E., Weide, T. P. V., Mbarika, V. W., & Kim, M. S. (2012). The Impact of Learning 
Driven Constructs on the Perceived Higher Order Cognitive Skills Improvement: 
Multimedia vs. Text" International Journal of Education and Development using ICT, 
8:120-130. 
 
Bosch, T. E. (2009). Using online social networking for teaching and learning: Facebook use at 
the university of Cape Town. Communication: South African Journal for Communication 
Theory and Research, 35:185–200.  
 
Brady, K. P., Holcomb, L. B., & Smith, B. V. (2010). The Use of Alternative Social Networking 
Sites in Higher Educational Settings: A Case Study of the E-Learning Benefits of Ning in 
Education. Journal of Interactive Online Learning www.ncolr.org/jiol, accessed 20 
November 2014 9:151-170.  
 
Brown, C., Thomas, H., van der Merwe, A., & van Dyk, L. (2008). The Impact of South Africa's 
ICT Infrastructure on Higher Education. Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference 
on e-Learning. 
 
Cloete, S., de Villiers, C., & Roodt, S. (2009). Facebook as an academic tool for ICT lecturers. 
SACLA '09 Proceedings of the 2009 Annual Conference of the Southern African 
Computer Lecturers' Association, 16-22 ACM, New York, US. 
 
Dabbagha, N. & Kitsantasb, A. (2012). Personal Learning Environments, social media, and self-
regulated learning: A natural formula for connecting formal and informal learning. The 
Internet and Higher Education, 15:3–8.  
 
Dalsgaard, C. (2006). Social software: E-learning beyond learning management systems. 
European Journal of Open, Distance, and E-Learning. Available at 
http://www.eurodl.org/materials/contrib/2006/Christian_Dalsgaard.htm. Accessed 10 
November 2014. 
 
Du, Z., Fu, X., Zhao, C., Liu, Q., & Liu, T. (2013). Interactive and collaborative e learning platform 
with integrated social software and learning management systems. Proceedings of the 
2012 International Conference on Information Technology and software Engineering & 
Digital Media Technology. Lecture notes in Electrical Engineering 212, Springer, 11-19. 
 
Dumbrajs, S., Jagerb, T. De., Bergström-Nybergc, S. (2013). 9th Grade students looking at their 
chemistry studies. Comparison between Finland and South Africa. 2nd Cyprus 
International Conference on Educational Research, (CY-ICER 2013) Science Direct.  
Social and Behavioral Sciences 89: 40 – 48 1877-0428 © 2013 doi: 
10.1016/j.sbspro.2013.08.806 
 
Freeman, W. (2014). Taming social media in higher education classrooms. Proceedings of 9th 
international conference on networked learning, 359-363. 
 
Hamid, S., Chang, S., & Kurnia, S. (2009). Identifying the use of online social networking in 
Higher Education. Proceedings Ascilite Auckland 2009: Poster. 419-422. 
 

182   IJEDICT 
 
Hoijtink, P. (2015). Digital natives key to retail future – survey: South Africa to see ‘more 
purchasing via social media’ in future. 14:53. http://www.moneyweb.co.za/news/south-
africa/digital-natives-key-to-retail-future-survey. Accessed 10 March 2015 
 
Hough, J. & Neuland, E. (2014). Strategic management and the use of information and 
communication technologies by selected South African and American students. SAJHE, 
28:455–465. 
 
Isabirye, A. K. & Dlodlo, N. (2014). Perceived Inhibitors of Innovative E-Learning Teaching 
Practice at a South African University of Technology. Mediterranean Journal of Social 
Sciences, 5:390-398. 
 
Jaffer, S., N'gambi, D., & Czerniewicz, L. (2007). The role of ICTs in higher education in South 
Africa: One strategy for addressing teaching and learning challenges. International 
Journal of Education and ICT, 3:131-142. 
 
Junco, R., Heiberger, G., & Loken, E. (2010). The effect of Twitter on college student 
engagement and grades. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 27:119-132.  
 
MacGregor, K. (2008). SOUTH AFRICA: Universities not far behind the curve. 
http://www.universityworldnews.com/article.php?story=20080807153150438. 10th August 
2008 Issue No: 40. Accessed 4th April 2015. 
 
Millham, R., Thakur, S., & Malan, C. (2014). Does Self-Regulating E-Learning Assist in 
Secondary School Preparation for Engineering Education? Proceedings of 2014 Zone 1 
Conference of the American Society for Engineering Education.  
 
Mlitwa, N. (2006). E-learning and Learning Management Systems (LMS) in a changing higher 
education environment. “Transforming IS & CS Education and Research in a changing 
Higher Education Environment” conference. Capetown. 
 
Mlitwa, W. & Van Belle, J. W. G. D. (2011). Mediators for lecturer perspectives on learning 
management systems at universities in the Western Cape, South Africa. In Proceedings 
of the Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems (PACIS 2011), 2011, Brisbane, 
Australia. Brisbane: AIS Electronic Library. 
 
Mohamed, N. & Peerbhay, F. (2012). Introducing dental students to e-learning at a South African 
University. African Journal of Health Professions Education, 4:123-127. 
 
Moll, I., Adam, F., Backhouse, J., & Mhlang, E. (2007). Status Report on ICTs and Higher 
Education in South Africa. 
http://www.judybackhouse.com/pdfs/saide_status_of_elearning_in_sa.pdf.  
 
OERAfrica, (2014). Case studies: delivering eLearning in South Africa. 
http://www.oerafrica.org/supporting-distance-learners/case-studies-delivering-elearning-
south-africa. Accessed on 7th November 2014. 
 
Ravjee, N. (2007). The politics of e-learning in South African higher education. International 
Journal of Education and Development using Information and Communication 
Technology (IJEDICT), 3 (4); 27-41. 
 

eLearning	  usage	  in	  South	  African	  universities	  	  	  	      183 
	  
Rinco, J.G.C. & Sandoval, J.A.L. (2014). Use of social networks, a path to training in blended 
learning community. Proceedings of the third international conference on informatics and 
applications.  
 
Rodriguez, J.E. (2011). Social media use in Higher Education: key areas to consider for 
educators. MERLOT Journal of Online Learning and Teaching, 7:539-550. 
 
Rohleder, P., Swartz, L., Bozalek, V., Carolissen, R., & Leibowitz, B. (2008). Community, self and 
identity: Participation action research and the creation of a virtual community across two 
South African universities. Teaching in Higher Education, 13:131-143. 
 
Sibanda, M. & Donnelly, S. (2014). The Impact of E-Learning on Student Performance: A Case 
Study of an Entry-Level Module at a South African University. Mediterranean Journal of 
Social Sciences, 5: 478-485. 
 
Ssekakubo, G., Suleman, H., & Marsden, G. (2011). Issues of Adoption: Have E-Learning 
Management Systems Fulfilled their Potential in Developing Countries? SAICSIT11, 
October 3–5, 2011, Cape Town, South Africa.  
 
Thinyane, H. (2010). Are digital natives a world-wide phenomenon? An investigation into South 
African first year students’ use and experience with technology. Computers & Education 
55: 406–414. 
 
 
 
Copyright for articles published in this journal is retained by the authors, with first publication rights granted 
to the journal. By virtue of their appearance in this open access journal, articles are free to use, with proper 
attribution, in educational and other non-commercial settings. 
Original article at: http://ijedict.dec.uwi.edu/viewarticle.php?id=2024 
 
 
