http://www.sajce.co.za
Open Access
South African Journal of Childhood Education 
ISSN: (Online) 2223-7682, (Print) 2223-7674
Page 1 of 9
Original Research
Read online:
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Authors:
Roy Venketsamy1 
Denise Miller1 
Affiliations:
1Department of Early 
Childhood Education, 
Faculty of Education, 
University of Pretoria, 
Pretoria, South Africa
Corresponding author:
Roy Venketsamy,
roy.venketsamy@up.ac.za
Dates:
Received: 13 July 2020
Accepted: 15 Apr. 2021
Published: 18 June 2021
How to cite this article:
Venketsamy, R. & Miller, D., 
2021, ‘Factors affecting 
parents’ choice of schools 
for Grade 1 learners’, South 
African Journal of Childhood 
Education 11(1), a913.
https://doi.org/10.4102/
sajce.v11i1.913
Copyright:
© 2021. The Authors. 
Licensee: AOSIS. This work 
is licensed under the 
Creative Commons 
Attribution License.
Introduction 
One of the seminal changes that occurred with the advent of a democratic government was 
the change in the South African education system. A primary consideration for the educational 
changes was to make schooling more accessible to all South African children. Parental 
decisions concerning the choice of a primary school for their Grade 1 learners in the public 
school system in South Africa had become much more complex today than 25 years ago. 
According to the National Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No 27 of 1996), the school is obliged 
to admit learners within its feeder zone (Gauteng Education Department [GDE] 2019). Spaull 
(2013), stated that South Africa has the worst education of all middle-income countries, thus 
causing concern amongst parents. Parents are fully aware of this phenomenon and therefore 
enquire and seek out a school that provides quality education (Msila 2009; Ntekane 2018). It 
seemed that some parents became more involved in the choice of a public school and 
would like to exercise this choice in an attempt to find a school that offers quality education 
(Msila 2009). This study aimed to investigate factors that influence parents’ choice of schools 
for their Grade 1 children. Many parents are experiencing challenges in deciding about 
which school their children will attend.
Objective
The objective of this study was to identify factors that influence parents’ choice of schools 
for  their Grade 1 child. It further envisages making recommendations to improve and 
support parents in making this important choice.
Background: Parents are challenged to choose schools for their Grade 1 learners. They believe 
that the Department of Education’s zoning and admission policy is too restrictive. Schools also 
do not provide adequate information to allow parents to make their choice.
Aim: This article aimed to identify factors that influence parents’ choice of schools for their 
Grade 1 learners.
Setting: This study was conducted in Gauteng province. The identified environment and 
location provided rich data solicited from the participants on how they chose the schools.
Methods: This was a qualitative case study using individual and focus group interviews, with 
10 parents (5 mothers and 5 fathers) of children enrolled in an ex-model C school. The parents’ 
choice of school was examined through the seminal work of Hirschman’s ‘Exit, Voice and 
Loyalty’ theoretical framework, which applied the three different elements to understand and 
identify the phenomenon of school choice in South Africa.
Results: The data gathered indicated that parents made choices considering the following 
factors: proximity; cost; curriculum; technology and relationships. 
Conclusion: Since parents disagreed with the department’s policy on admission, the 
Minister of the Gauteng Department of Education stated that the new school feeder zone 
regulation would ensure fair access to schools for all learners. This means that learners will 
not be discriminated against where they live. During the admission application process, the 
amended regulations are intended to assist learners to access schools in compliance with 
certain criteria. Parents are encouraged to select a minimum of three schools to enrol their 
children. 
Keywords: Grade 1; school choice; curriculum; language; safety.
Factors affecting parents’ choice of schools 
for Grade 1 learners
Read online:
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.

Page 2 of 9
Original Research
http://www.sajce.co.za
Open Access
Literature review
The literature review focusses on factors influencing parents’ 
choice of schools for their Grade 1 learners. The review also 
pays particular attention to various factors that parents take 
into consideration when choosing a school.
Parents’ choice of school
The second most important decision a parent will make, 
apart from deciding to have children, is deciding on which 
school to enrol them. Making the right decision is vital as 
this could put them on a path towards lifelong learning, a 
prestigious tertiary education and a successful career 
(Gomendio 2017). There has been a consistent interest in the 
phenomenon of school choice by academics, economists 
and policymakers. According to Levin and Milgrom (2004): 
In the standard view, rational choice is defined to mean the 
process of determining what options are available and then 
choosing the most preferred one according to some consistent 
criterion. (p. 1)
Dass and Rinquest (2017) and Plank and Sykes (2003), stated 
that school choice is where parents have an increasing say 
regarding which school their children will attend, particularly 
in the public sector. Although the South African governments, 
through different policies, make it possible for parents to make 
school choices, ultimately the parents decide, which school 
their child should attend. This decision is made taking into 
account various factors. Hirschman’s (1970) theoretical 
framework gave parents the responsibility and accountability 
to make the most appropriate choices for their children by 
applying the principles of ‘Exit, Voice, or Loyalty’ options. Most 
South African parents are beginning to exercise these rights and 
responsibilities after the promulgation of the amended school 
admission policy by Minister Lesufi (Moodley 2019).
Parent’s choice manifests itself in the public schooling system 
through a process of supply and demand. As education is not 
traditionally seen as a trading commodity, it is regarded as a 
quasi-market system. What needs to be acknowledged is that 
the legislative framework, about South Africa, created a 
quasi-market system in the education sector. According to 
Canals et al. (2018), the discussion regarding school choice 
has been on centralising the concept, which sees choice as 
codes for the marketing of education. School policies and 
legislation nationally and internationally focus on regulating 
school choice; this is not different within the South African 
context (Moodley 2019). According to Hoadley (1999), school 
policies in Britain and the United States were put in place to 
promote excellent performance in the education system, thus 
allowing parents to make their school choice. 
The core of the argument is that an education system 
organised around free choice will enhance competitions 
amongst schools and in turn promote educational 
performance. If school choice is related to the market, then 
one has to acknowledge that it has an impact on the 
selection process and the options that parents have. Within 
the South African context, the choice of the best schools in 
the country is favoured by a select few who can afford the 
exorbitant school fees. However, most parents, according to 
Dass and Rinquest (2017) have limited school choices for 
their learners because of financial difficulties, therefore 
opting for no-fee schools. 
Factors influencing parents’ choice of schools
The complexity of choice is further affirmed by the work 
carried out by Ball (2006) on school choice who argued: 
[P]arental choice of school is not susceptible to one definitive 
analysis. Different kinds of analyses highlight different aspects 
and patterns of choice. There are recurring themes and patterns, 
like the multifaceted relationships between social class and 
choice. (p. 89)
He further argues that parents are required to regard 
themselves as consumers of education, in other words, they 
can shop around for schools that best suit their needs. Parents 
are encouraged to see themselves as consumers of education 
and ‘good parenting’ is defined, at least in part, concerning 
the ‘responsibilities’ of choice’. In 2003, John Pampallis 
contended that school choice was part of addressing the 
injustices brought about by apartheid (Pampallis 2003:143). 
He further elaborated that in the light of South Africa’s recent 
history, school choice is interwoven with overcoming racism 
and the aftermath of apartheid. Even though school choice is 
linked to addressing the injustices of the past apartheid 
system, there are also several factors concerning the practice 
in South Africa that resonate with the international arena. 
These causative factors as identified by Pampallis (2003:143) 
are ‘parental control and community participation, school 
fees, marketization and competition between schools, class 
privilege, resource distribution, decentralization, liberty 
versus equality and school admission policies’.
In South Africa, according to Woolman and Fleisch (2006), 
the legislative framework that is National Education Policy Act 
(NEPA) No. 27 of 1996 and South African Schools Act (SASA) 
No. 84 of 1996 created school choice thus creating a quasi-
market system in the public school system. According to 
Woolman and Fleisch (2006), the elements required for a 
quasi-market in schools exist are multiple schools of variable 
quality, information dissemination that can ensure informed 
decision-making, various schools and information on each so 
that parents can prioritise their preferences and a variation in 
price that meets the demands. This quasi-market system is 
skewed. In urban areas, there are enough products (schools) 
and buyers (parents) to choose from. However, in rural areas, 
many parents cannot exercise school choices as the high costs 
exclude them from exercising these options. It is also within 
this system that schools with exorbitant prices select who can 
access their school and thus determine whom they choose.
Although the given perspective seems quite simple and 
straightforward, Woolman and Fleisch argue how the 
interplay of various events in the South African legislation 
framework creates school choice, which enables parents to 

Page 3 of 9
Original Research
http://www.sajce.co.za
Open Access
choose to exercise ‘voice, loyalty or exit’. Furthermore, 
school choice is a complex phenomenon driven by a varied 
set of factors, enabled by public policy and dependent on 
supply and demand, which create conditions for quasi-
markets in schools (Woolman & Fleisch 2006).
One has to acknowledge the perceptions and experiences of 
parents that give rise to parental choice. According to Denessen 
et al. (2001), parents’ school choice is influenced by the 
perceptions of parents and evidence that the culture of teaching 
and learning has steadily declined in some schools. This decline 
of learning and teaching manifests itself in dilapidated 
buildings, bad school discipline by educators, learners and 
delays in stationery and learning materials acquisition. As most 
parents have experienced and observed this phenomenon 
during their schooling and education, they are very eager to 
ensure that their children receive a quality education in 
comparison to theirs. Most parents are exercising their rights 
and responsibilities by making their voices heard and exiting 
schools where they are unhappy (Hirschman 1970).
According to the findings of Evans and Cleghorn (2014), 
school choice was influenced by the reputation and medium 
of instruction. In their study, a significant percentage of 
parents cite the reputation of the school as a key choice factor. 
Reputation received a score of 95.3% as an influential factor 
when it comes to school choice coupled with firm discipline. 
The parents alluded to the fact that the school’s high standard 
also contributes to the school’s positive reputation. This 
factor is also evident in the international scenario that even 
when parents do not participate in the voucher or charter 
system, they still ranked educational quality at or near the 
top according to Hamilton and Guin (2005:42). Although the 
curriculum is relatively standardised in South African 
schools, schools may add to what they offer. Parents recognise 
this in their choice of schools and focus on appreciation of 
their children’s strengths and weaknesses and effective 
teaching approaches (Hegarty 1993:124).
Maile (2004:105) raised another interesting factor that is 
particularly noteworthy in the 21st century and that is the 
attraction of schools that are technologically connected. He 
focusses on the parents’ tendency of preferring schools with 
new information technologies and innovative programmes. 
This factor is strongly linked to future employment 
opportunities, as schools that offer innovative programmes 
tend to be in private–public partnerships with enterprise 
development and are, therefore, competitive and add value 
to a future work pool, according to the DBE (2014).
According to Msila (2009), parents prefer schools with a 
sound reputation, good management and firm discipline, 
combined with dedicated teachers. Parents also proffered 
that despite the lack of resources, township schools are 
sometimes more effective (Msila 2009). In the South African 
context, it is important to note that these factors did not 
necessarily refer to a choice movement from township 
schools to suburbia schools. Astor et al. (2005) identified the 
following influential factors that were proposed by parents, 
namely excellent time management especially when it comes 
to the successful execution of tasks, successful monitoring of 
progress, harmonious relationships with parents, safe 
learning environments, academic focus and clarity of mission 
statement combined with high expectations.
Another factor that influences parents’ choice of schools is 
cost and proximity. Msila (2009) observed that in his study 
participants reported that proximity to the home was a factor 
because it was financially favourable. According to Msila 
(2009), this group of parents although still choosing township 
schools, could choose the best school close to the home. This 
choice was expressed amongst others as many of the 
important people in the community had studied there and 
this school is one of the oldest schools. It is clear from the 
statement that the ‘loyalty’ option has been exercised by the 
parents according to the theoretical framework. The parents 
who exercised choice within township schools showed that, 
despite their economic situation, some of them knew what 
they wanted for their children (Durisic & Buijevac 2017). In 
their study, Evans and Cleghorn (2014) stated that school fees 
influence parents’ choice of schools. According to Woolman 
and Fleisch (2006), several market-related factors also 
influence school choice. In their study, they recognised that 
parents seek out schools with reasonable and affordable 
school fees. This is evident that choices that parents make, 
they contend, subscribe to the markets. 
According to Zuilkowski et al. (2017), it was found that high-
income parents exercise school choice for their children. These 
parents prefer to purchase homes near the school. Woolman 
and Fleisch (2006) contended that the National Education Policy 
Act no. 27 of 1996, the SASA and the Employment of Educators 
Act provide the conditions that incentivise parents to exercise 
their options of school choice because parents exercise 
authority in the governance of the school through the School 
Governing Body (SGB). Schools can decide to charge specific 
amounts as school fees. These amounts are determined by the 
SGB. It is in the interests of the schools to then allow as many 
full fee-paying learners notwithstanding their residential area. 
This influences the parental school choice as parents can more 
freely ‘shop’ around for the school of their choice 
notwithstanding their residential area (Dass & Rinquest 2017).
Parents in a study by Evans and Cleghorn (2014) also cited 
proximity to home and workplace as important factors 
influencing school choice. In responses 46.5% participants 
stated that the school must preferably be close to where they 
live. Another 60.3% stated that it is advantageous if the 
school is close to where they work, which emphasises that 
location is a crucial factor when choosing a school (Evans & 
Cleghorn 2014). The fact that parents also based their choice 
on the medium of instruction, and particularly English, is an 
interesting factor. In Evans and Cleghorn’s (2014), study this 
was evident when parents chose a school with an Afrikaans 
history yet there were four English medium primary schools 
in close vicinity. The school has adopted English as the 
medium of instruction.

Page 4 of 9
Original Research
http://www.sajce.co.za
Open Access
The language factor is influential in parental choice, as it 
illustrates parents’ perception that English provides their 
children access to better resources and ultimately the world 
of work, where English is the dominant language (Evans & 
Cleghorn 2014; Maile 2004; Msila 2009). The choice of 
schools  based on language and especially English in the 
current South African society has strong political and 
improving social standing connotations (Lombard 2007; 
Maile 2004; Msila 2009). English [is] commonly viewed as 
the  gateway to modernity, according to Heugh as cited in 
Evans & Cleghorn (2014). However, one should not hold an 
absolute view of English versus indigenous language use as 
English being the superior. According to Heugh (2002:15), 
‘an attachment to and high value accorded to English does 
not necessarily imply that an attachment to indigenous 
languages is proportionately reduced’.
Another two factors that are of interest to this study are 
that  many parents make their choice not so much on the 
information disseminated by the schools, but really through 
friends and word of mouth. Most parents asserted that they 
based their judgements about the school quality mainly on the 
opinions of individuals who were part of their social networks 
(Lipsky, Friedman & Harkema 2017). In the study, it was also 
noticed that the kind of information parents shared was not 
generally about the school curriculum and the instructional 
quality, but it was more about the status of the parents who 
sent their children to the school. This observation is supported 
by the work of Msila (2009) who found that parents based their 
choice of school on the historical reputation of the school and 
if they could identify former community and national leaders 
who had attended the school, it was an incentive. Many of the 
renowned people in the community studied at that particular 
school which also encouraged parents to support the tradition 
of enrolling their children in the older schools, thus exercising 
their ‘loyalty’ option according to Hirschman’s theory.
Theoretical framework
A theoretical framework is defined as a system of concepts, 
assumptions, theories, beliefs and expectations that shape 
the research (Collins & Stockton 2018). Based on the seminal 
work of Hirschman’s (1970) theory of ‘Exit, Loyalty and 
Voice’, parents can exercise choice by selecting any of the 
three kinds of choices when it comes to school choice. The 
voice option of the theory mentions the choice that parents 
have when they decide to stay in their current schools 
whilst they change them from within. Regarding the loyalty 
option, this refers to parents who do not have any alternative 
but to let their children remain in the school even when 
they are not effective. The exit option refers to parents’ 
exercising their choice to move their children from their 
schools and residential area to find the schools where the 
quality of education is according to their expectations 
(Parret & Budge 2016).
Based on A.O. Hirschman’s theory, parents usually shop 
around for better schools when they are not happy with 
what  they have in their locality; they, therefore, take their 
business outside of their home environment. Neuman (2018) 
also contended that parents complain about the declining 
quality of education their children receive and therefore 
need  to find schools that are providing quality education. 
Parret and Budge (2016) argued that learners from poor-
performing schools migrate to better schools to acquire skills 
that will make them earn more and be economically 
empowered in the future. Parents, therefore, make choices 
regarding a school and have the ability to manage and deal 
with the consequences of such choices (Moore 2016).
Methodology
This study applied a qualitative research approach located 
within the interpretivist paradigm to elicit factors that 
influence parents’ choice of school for their Grade 1 learner 
(Yin 2018). According to Denzin and Lincoln (2011), this 
method provides the researcher with an opportunity to 
explore parents’ reasons and motives for doing what they do 
and making meaning from them.
Data were collected through in-depth individual and focus 
group interviews. A purposive sampling method was used 
to select 10 parents (P), 5 mothers and 5 fathers from the 
same family who had children in an ex-model C public 
primary school in one district in the Gauteng province. A 
case study was chosen because the author aimed to elicit 
parents’ explanation of their choice of schools for their 
children. Maree (2017) stated that a case study is based on a 
single individual or group, which may be descriptive or 
explanatory. Eight participants (four mothers and four 
fathers) participated in the focus group interview. One 
mother and one father of two learners were unable to 
participate in the focus group interview because of their 
work 
schedules. 
These 
parents 
were 
interviewed 
individually according to their availability in their homes. 
The author used a semi-structured open-ended interview 
questionnaire to elicit information on parents’ choice of 
schools for their children. The questions produced 
biographical data and questions on exit, voice and loyalty as 
described in the theoretical framework. Participants also 
responded to the factors that influenced their choice of 
schools for their Grade 1 learners.
Data analysis was inductive and emerged largely from 
individual and focus group interviews that were captured 
using the audio recording (Creswell 2014). The data were 
FIGURE 1: Parental school choices and positions taken.
Parents generally
keep their children
in the school
LOYALTY
Parents try to
address issues
from inside the
school for example, 
parcipanng on
the School
Governing Body
Parents tend to
leave the school
if their needs
have not been
met.
VOICE
EXIT

Page 5 of 9
Original Research
http://www.sajce.co.za
Open Access
analysed using the thematic approach (Creswell 2014; 
Guest,  MacQueen & Namey 2012). The researcher 
compared  multiple data sources in search of common 
themes  (Creswell 2014). To ensure that the data were 
correct  and without misinterpretation, post-transcription 
member checking took place (Maree 2017).
Discussion and findings
From the data analysis, the following two major themes 
emerged that were used to answer the research questions:
•	 interpretation of education policy and the effect on the 
school 
•	 factors that influence parents’ choice of schools.
Verbatim quotes are used as evidence in the results. 
This  section presents findings that emanated from the 
participants’ responses.
Theme 1: Interpretation of education policy and 
the effect on school choice based on proximity 
to home
There appears to be an interconnectedness between the 
parental interpretation of the education access policy about 
school proximity to home and how parents exercised school 
choices for their Grade 1 learner. The responses by 
participants indicated that they did not always favour the 
closest school to their residence, but were guided by a 
public education Policy on Regulations Relating to the 
Admission of Learners in Public Schools (GDE 2019) to 
consider this factor during school choice. Parents 1 and 2 
clearly articulated their dismay by stating:
‘Given this new basic education system it does not give you much 
choice, and because schools are divided according to zones you 
live in and so because this school was in my zone other schools 
refused to take my child. So I did not have much of a choice, I was 
almost forced to put her in that school.’
This was further articulated by Parent 1 who said:
‘I lived in an area that wasn’t, so ideal in terms of schools ... 
Remember the Department of Education will do the zoning story 
and because of that zoning, my zone A had a public school of a 
poor quality, so we had to move further out.’
Evidence from the participants indicates that parents do not 
have much option when it comes to the choice of schools for 
their Grade 1 learner. This is in agreement with Hirschman’s 
theoretical framework loyalty option because of their 
disadvantage parents are forced to be loyal to the school to 
let their children remain in the school even though the 
education is not up to their standard (Ntekane 2018).
The Department of Education’s policy on zoning and 
admission did not favour Parent 9 who said:
‘My daughter was actually put on the B list, yes, and they 
called me just a couple of days before schools opened. I applied 
at a lot of schools, but all of them declined her because she did 
not stay in the area.’
Parent 9 went on further to explain why she excised her 
choice to move her child out of the school by stating: 
‘All the other schools that I wanted my child to go to are very far 
away. My child would wake up early in the morning and it was 
too much effort for her and myself because of the distance, so 
that’s why I decided to take her out and bring her closer to home.’
The observation by Parents 1, 3 and 9 indicated how parents 
exercised their choice by using their ability to exit a school. 
They were not satisfied with the school and therefore, found 
strategies to remove their children from the school. Parent 1 
also later indicated that she was no longer satisfied with the 
school and could now move her child, as the GDE compulsory 
online process no longer restricted her. Parent 9 could move 
her daughter closer to home after 2 years of attending a 
school quite far from home. From this finding, it is evident 
that parents’ exercised their authority to ‘exit’, which is in 
agreement with the ‘exit option’ in Hirschman’s theoretical 
framework. Msila (2009), stated that sometimes parents 
move their children within the townships searching for what 
they believe are quality schools.
The GDE introduced the compulsory online application for 
learners in Grades 1 and 8 (GDE 2018). Parents are required 
to indicate that their choices are according to the following 
criteria: home, work, sibling and choice of school. Several 
participants reflected on the negative influence the education 
policy had on their school choice. According to Msila (2009), 
parents exercised school choice through ‘loyalty’ and ‘exit’ 
as  articulated in the theoretical framework of Hirschman. 
This choice option is clearly illustrated in the conversation 
with Parent 1 who stated:
‘I have no option but to keep my child in this school because all 
the other schools are too far away from my home. I also do not 
have money for transport to the other schools.’
According to Parent 2, he said, ‘I could not keep my child in 
a school where she is not provided with quality education.’
Theme 2: Factors that influence parents’ choice 
of schools
Learner–teacher relationships and the impact on the 
culture of teaching and learning
Participants also reflected on the relationship between parent–
teachers and teacher–learners about the quality of teaching 
and learning. Parents acknowledged that it was  difficult to 
receive access to this information. They  agreed that this 
relationship structure was a strong  indicator of quality 
teaching and learning. Claessens et al. (2016) agreed that the 
teacher–student relationship makes a tremendous impact on 
students’ learning. Moment-to-moment interactions between 
teacher and student are the building blocks for their 
relationship. Regarding learner–teacher relationships, parents 
articulated their voices accordingly. Parent 1 stated:
‘You know my seven-year-old daughter’s teacher is an 
excellent teacher; she is an old teacher but you can see she is 
passionate about teaching. [My daughter]. She is excited about 
learning.’

Page 6 of 9
Original Research
http://www.sajce.co.za
Open Access
Parent 2 strongly said that parents need to:
‘[C]heck for the relationship between the child and teacher and 
parent and teacher – how that relationship is – those are some of 
the things I also look into what kind of feedback. When you go 
for the reports, when you have your one-on-one with the teacher, 
determine what kind of feedback the teacher gives you. Decide if 
it is a positive and or negative one and if it is negative 
monitor how she handles that feedback.’
Parent 8 contributed to the discussion of the teacher–learner 
and parent–teacher relationship by articulating:
‘I mean your child is placed randomly in a class and you seldom 
meet the teacher, but the relationship between the parents and 
the teacher in the Foundation Phase is very important. The child 
is with the teacher for the whole day.’
Parent 8 was satisfied and therefore placed his second child 
at the school that could be interpreted as exercising his 
loyalty towards the school, which is in agreement with the 
‘loyalty’ option of Hirschman. When parents are not satisfied, 
they will exercise their exit agency (Msila 2009). It was 
important to note the emphasis that parents put on a personal 
relationship with the teachers and between the teachers and 
their children. This was regarded as a key indicator for the 
quality of teaching and learning and a key factor influencing 
parent school choice for their Grade 1 learners.
Parents 1 and 2 agreed with Week (2012) that a process of 
relationship building is required for a healthy and conducive 
culture of teaching and learning. Initially, educators and 
learners are strangers and a definite ‘distance’ exists 
between them. Claessens et al. (2016) articulated that as 
educators and learners work towards a better relationship, 
their knowledge and understanding of each other improve 
trust and respect for one another gradually increase or 
decrease. The willingness to accept authoritative guidance 
develops over time.
Access to available information on the school
It became apparent in the semi-structured interviews with 
parents that they based their school choosing their Grade 1 
learner on very limited access to formal information sources. 
The primary formal information sources are the open days of 
schools and physical visits to the school. It was also interesting 
to note that participants visited school websites. The biggest 
information sources are mainly informal and through ‘word 
of mouth’. Participants seemed to find these more trustworthy 
as indicated in the response by Parent 5, ‘… we heard from 
colleagues whose children are also going there; we weren’t 
aware of the other Afrikaans medium schools. I wasn’t even 
aware that there was such a school’.
Although it was important for this participant to place the 
child in an Afrikaans medium school, he only gained 
knowledge about the existence of other Afrikaans medium 
schools in the area once he had access to the GDE list of 
allocated schools close to his home. Parent 4 added, ‘Basically 
I  went […] to a few schools to enquire also on what it is 
they  can help us with, and how they could accommodate 
us’.  Other parents needed more information and this is 
evident in Parent 7’s response:
‘What facilities they have, how long the schools have existed and 
visiting the school to see what kind of facilities they have and the 
mix of students they have are important.’
This participant further indicated to obtain information 
about the school he said:
‘I had conversations with teachers on an open day or a special 
visit to the school. There is normally a person that will take you 
through the school, show you how many classes they have what 
kind of methods they use to encourage learning and also inform 
you about the number of children they accept and why.’
Other parents were disappointed with the lack of information 
and Parent 3 articulated the following:
‘I never had any information because I did not hear anywhere 
about the school as I was new to the Centurion area I did not get a 
referral of some sort. I just googled, I called the school. I managed 
to get so much information on the school.’
The responses from participants made it clear that parents 
trust informal information and especially information 
obtained from other parents who had the experience of the 
school. A high premium was placed on information gained 
through 
informal 
networks. 
Parents 
suggested 
that 
prospective parents should speak to parents who have 
children attending the school or whose children attended the 
school in the past. This is supported by research carried out 
by Altenhofen, Berends and White (2016) who argued that 
parents do rely on their social networks to determine their 
school choice. According to Bishop, (as cited in Altenhofen 
et al. 2016), people tend to associate with those who share 
similar networks, whether by socio-economic status, race, 
ethnicity, values, age, religion and/or cultural tastes. This 
information is highly valued by the group. Their study found 
that there is a difference in access to information between 
low-income parents and high-income parents, stating that 
social networks of low-income families may be restricted in 
the information they can access.
Good discipline and the safety of their children
Discipline and safety were regarded as key factors influencing 
a parental decision in school choice. Discipline and safety 
were regarded as interdependent as the discipline was 
regarded as a precursor to a safe school environment. In a 
report on school discipline, according to DBE (2014), it was 
estimated that bullying in school is as high as 14%. Given 
these statistics, parents articulate discipline and safety as 
key factors influencing their school choice-making process. 
It  should also be noticed that parents-related school 
discipline  as a key requirement for a safe schooling 
environment. It was articulated as follows by Parent 1:
‘… you speak to other parents and you hear which schools are 
good in terms of their discipline. I knew that there was a 
disciplinary issue; the thing is the school took in more learners 
than what they could manage – it was not necessarily bad but the 
school is losing its reputation. That time I said let me give the 

Page 7 of 9
Original Research
http://www.sajce.co.za
Open Access
school the benefit of the doubt … and now I want to take my 
children out of the school. I have been there; I have seen it with 
my own eyes … And the thing is if you look at Grade 1 and Grade 
8 with those two grades, you have to go via the online system, so 
my daughter is no longer in Grade 1 in this school. So now I can 
look at other schools because I do not have to go via that online 
system. For me, it is a safety issue and I want to know, what time 
is break, are the small children separated from the bigger ones, 
and are supervised during breaks.’ 
Regarding the safety of their children, Parent 2 decided to 
take her child out of the school. She indicated: 
‘My reason for taking him out was how my voicing of my 
dissatisfaction will affect him if I leave him there. How will they 
treat him? They will say “Oh this is the trouble-maker’s child 
you know.” It was also in terms of protecting him. Teachers 
don’t like parents who come to school to complain about issues 
like “the child is being bullied” or “being pushed around.” Too 
often, I hear teachers say “Children must grow up and defend 
themselves.” Not in primary schools. I just had to take my child 
out for his safety.’
It was evident, during the conversations with the parents, 
that they would exercise their agency and exit the school 
when they perceived that their children’s safety would be 
compromised. According to Msila (2009:83), parents will also 
use the safety factor, or rather the lack thereof, to move their 
children out of their area of residence (Parent 6). It has been 
shown that safety is a critical factor in determining school 
choice. In a study on school choice and safety, Deming (2012) 
found that students who feel safer in schools are more likely 
to remain enrolled in school and they show modest 
improvement on a measure of behaviours such as absence 
and suspensions. Safety at school determines whether a child 
is benefitting from a quality educational experience (Walter 
2012). According to Altenhofen et al. (2016), safety in schools 
and discipline in schools are often cited as important factors 
influencing the choice of schools and parents may even 
consider statistical data from state departments to determine 
the safety of the school area and the school itself.
Extra curricular activities and the curriculum
When questioned about curriculum matters, parents placed 
much emphasis on curriculum and the choice of school. The 
curriculum is a strong factor for parents. Several parents 
based their final decision-making on what they understood 
the curriculum could offer their Grade 1 learner. A notable 
aspect that was raised by parents was their appreciation of 
the elements added to the classroom in the curriculum. This 
appreciation went beyond what the school promised to give 
in class. This included the extracurricular or as it is known 
the extramural activities, sport and the support that the 
school provides for learners who are struggling either with 
the academic programme or other social aspects. Parent 5 
indicated her satisfaction regarding extra-mural activities by 
stating: 
‘Where my child has learnt the most is during the extracurricular 
activities he chose. He enjoyed playing with other children and 
became very sociable. He even went on to do some science 
experiments with friends and he is enjoying it. He is learning 
a  bit of science about the weather, physics and chemistry 
at his level.’ (Participant P1–10)
Parent 10 said: ‘This school’s curriculum goes beyond the 
department’s policies’. She voiced her view by saying:
‘This school where my child is, use the CAPS policy and the 
Rainbow workbooks. Every day my child comes home with 
homework to do. Because they are using the national policy, I am 
glad that they are covering the curriculum.’
Parents were quite satisfied with the curriculum and 
extramural activities at school as indicated by Parent 7 who 
voiced her opinion saying: 
‘My daughter became more open-minded in terms of her thinking 
they encourage a lot of independent work. They did not handhold 
kids for too long and even, you know when you start, you see a 
child has improved when they are interacting with their peers 
and you could see that her level of acting, of reasoning, is beyond 
that of her peers … What was great of the school – where a child 
struggles they make provision for extra classes – and they identify 
the problem before you can.’
The importance of the curriculum and academic quality of 
the school choice factor are supported by various research 
studies. This is also supported by work performed by 
Altenhofen et al. (2016:2), who commented: One of the 
parent’s main concerns when choosing a school is academic 
quality. 
However, 
the 
definitions 
and 
identifying 
characteristics of academic quality may be influenced by 
different variables for different parents. This phenomenon is 
explained by Altenhofen et al. (2016:2) who stated that ‘Sixty-
three percent (63%) of parents reported that academics was 
an important factor in their choice’. This is supported by 
Burgess et al. (2009) who found that the three main factors 
that families care about are academic attainment, school 
socio-economic composition and travel distance. From the 
given findings, it is evident that parents intend to keep their 
children in the chosen school because of their ‘loyalty’ and 
appreciation of the quality of education in the school 
(Ntekane 2018).
Medium of instruction
The medium of instruction was another key determiner of 
parents exercising their choice of school for their Grade 1 
learners. Parents were very articulate about the medium of 
instruction when choosing schools for their children. Parent 5 
stated very eloquently:
‘I wanted my child to go to an English medium school. I was 
not prepared to send my child to a dual medium school. I, 
therefore, asked around about the schools and what language 
they were teaching in. It was then that I chose to put my child 
in the school.’
Parents were very particular about the medium of instruction 
in their choices and it is clear when Parent 6 stated:
‘I wanted to put my child in an Afrikaans medium school. 
The closest school is an English school. We speak Afrikaans at 
home and that is why both my children are in an Afrikaans 

Page 8 of 9
Original Research
http://www.sajce.co.za
Open Access
primary school. I am a firm believer in primary school 
mother-tongue education so for me, it was great that we could 
have mother tongue education, but still a good solid foundation 
for when they grow up one day and I realise that when they go 
to university they’re going to have to converse in English. 
The standard of English for me was important so the fact that 
they are doing English first language for me is important.’ 
(Parent 8)
Participants equated the language factor in providing 
them  with the opportunity to access the ‘best schools’. 
According to Evans and Cleghorn (2014), parents also apply 
language as a factor for making a school choice. In their 
study, there was a recognition for the importance of mother 
tongue instruction, especially amongst the younger and 
slightly better-educated parents, which is the case with the 
participants in this study. The search for an Afrikaans 
medium of instruction school amongst the participants, as 
opposed to the preference of English as the medium of 
instruction for the others, was notable. Lombard (2007) and 
Msila (2009) both agreed that parents are very particular 
regarding the medium of instruction of a school. There is a 
general focus on English being viewed as the gateway to 
modernity (Evans & Cleghorn 2014), which motivates 
parents to enrol their children in schools that are 
English medium. Heugh (2002) thought that one should not 
hold an absolute view of English versus the mother tongue. 
Based on Hirschman’s theory, parents are willing to shop 
around for better quality schools when they are dissatisfied 
with the provision of education at a particular school within 
their residential area. They exercise their options of ‘exit’, 
‘voice’ and ‘loyalty’ to ensure that their children receive the 
best education and as Msila (2009) stated, parents are willing 
to take their business outside of their vicinity. Evidence from 
the literature and the findings indicate that parents are 
willing to exercise their rights and responsibility regarding 
their children’s education.
Recommendations and conclusion
Through focus and individual group interviews, participants 
in this study were allowed to share their views on the factors 
that influenced their choice of school for their Grade 1 
learners. The group interviews gave them an opportunity of 
sharing their views and challenges regarding issues on 
policies, proximity, curriculum, the language of teaching 
and  learning and extracurricular activities. The following 
recommendations emanated from the findings: It is 
recommended 
that 
schools 
design 
more 
interactive 
introductions to their respective schools. Schools must 
make  the open days very informative, as information 
gained at these events is an important factor that influences 
parents’ choice of schools. Parents should be allowed to 
‘observe classrooms in action’ and meet previous parents 
(alumni) to share their experiences (Msila 2009).
Regarding the school curriculum, it is recommended that 
parents should become more aware and involved in what is 
happening in the whole curriculum of the school (Ntekane 
2018). South Africa needs the school curriculum to support 
the transformation of the country. The school, therefore, has 
not only a role to play to ensure that it improves the academic 
ability of children but it also contributes to the dismantling of 
destructive social behaviours such as racism, violence 
amongst children and social discrimination amongst others. 
It is recognised that English is the preferred medium of 
instruction for parents when choosing a school for their 
Grade 1 learner. It is recommended that parents demand 
from schools to offer the indigenous languages with equal 
status based on the language demographics of the school 
community. Finally, it is recommended that school leaders 
should be capacitated to understand and manage schools in a 
highly complex and diverse society. All schools should be 
managed in such a manner that learners feel safe in a 
conducive learning environment (Week 2012). It should also 
instil discipline by applying methods that encourage social 
cohesion and social justice amongst the whole school 
community: the learners, staff and parents. Finally, it is 
recommended that school leaders should be capacitated to 
understand and manage schools in a highly complex and 
diverse society. All schools should be managed in such a 
manner that learners feel safe in a conducive learning 
environment. It should also instil discipline by applying 
methods that encourage social cohesion and social justice 
amongst the whole school community: the learners, staff and 
parents.
It is important to note that these factors play itself out in 
South African schools amidst the desire of the Ministry of 
Basic Education to ensure that all learners have equal access 
to education. In an independent review of the transformation 
of education, GDE emphasised equality. In this research 
study, a sample of 10 parents presented their challenges and 
the complexity of choosing a school for their Grade 1 learner 
as experienced by many parents in South Africa. All parents 
intended to provide their children with the best learning 
opportunities. The argument by Woolman and Fleisch (2006) 
might be that parents, and certainly middle-class parents, do 
have more access to school choice. However, in practice, it 
does not mean that the alternatives are equal in quality and 
social status. This makes the competition for the few schools, 
which parents regard as ‘good’ schools so much fiercer. It 
also resulted, as indicated by myself and the parents, in 
children being moved from a school where they started 
during the foundation phase of schooling to access their 
school of preferred choice by the parents.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the University of Pretoria for supporting 
this study and all critical readers who assisted in commenting 
on this study.
Competing interests
The authors have declared that no competing interest exists.

Page 9 of 9
Original Research
http://www.sajce.co.za
Open Access
Authors’ contributions
All authors contributed equally to this work.
Ethical considerations
The ethical consideration of this article included obtaining 
informed consent and maintaining anonymity, confidentiality, 
privacy, avoidance of betrayal and deception to meet the 
requirements of the ethical code of conduct. Ethics 
clearance  was obtained from the University of Pretoria 
Ethics Committee, number EC 17/07/01.
Funding information
The research received no specific grant from any funding 
agency in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.
Data availability
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new 
data  were created or analysed in this study.
Disclaimer
The views and opinions expressed in this article are those 
of  the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official 
policy or position of any affiliated agency of the authors.
References 
Altenhofen, S., Berends, M. & White, T.G., 2016, ‘School choice decision 
making among suburban high-income parents’, AERA Open 2(1), 1–14. https://
doi.org/10.1177/2332858415624098
Astor, R.A., Meyer, H.A., Benbenishty, R., Marachi, R. & Rosemond, M., 2005, ‘School 
safety interventions: Best practices and programs’, Journal of Children and School 
27(1), 17–32. https://doi.org/10.1093/cs/27.1.17
Ball, S.J., 2006, ‘School choice, social class and distinction: The realisation of social 
advantage in education’, Journal of Education Policy 11, 89–112. https://doi.
org/10.1080/0268093960110105
Burgess, S., Greaves, E., Vignoles, A. & Wislon, D., 2009, What parents want: School 
preferences and school choice, CMPO, Bristol.
Canals, C., Goles, E., Mascareno, A., Rica, S. & Ruz, G.A., 2018, ‘School choice in a 
market environment: Individual versus social expectations’, Hindawi Complexity 
2018, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/3793095
Claessens, L.C.A., Van Tartwijk, J., Van der Want, A.C., Pennings, H.J.M., Verloop, 
N., Den Brok, P.J. et al., 2016, ‘Positive teacher-student relationships 
go  beyond the classroom, problematic ones say inside’, The Journal of 
Educational Research 110(5), 478–493. https://doi.org/10.1080/00220671.20
15.1129595
Collins, C.S. & Stockton, C.M., 2018, ‘The central role of theory in qualitative research’, 
International Journal of Qualitative Methods 17(1), n.p. https://doi.
org/10.1177/1609406918797475
Creswell, J.W., 2014, Research design: Qualitative, quantitative and mixed methods 
approach, 4th edn., Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Dass, S. & Rinquest, A., 2017, ‘School fees’, in F. Veriava, A. Thom & T.F. Hodgson 
(eds.), Basic education rights handbook. Education rights in South Africa, 
Johannesburg, viewed 10 March 2018, from http://section27.org.za/wp-
content/uploads/2017/02/Chapter-7.pdf.
Deming, D.J., 2012, ‘Does school choice reduce crime? Evidence from North Carolina’, 
Education Next 12(2), 6–15.
Denessen, E., Driessen, G., Smit, F. & Sleegers, P., 2001, ‘Cultural differences in 
education: Implications for parental involvement and educational policies’, 
Conference: European Research Network About Parents in Education (ERNAPE), 
November 2001, Rotterdam.
Denzin, N.K. & Lincoln, Y.S. (eds.), 2011, The sage handbook of qualitative research, 
4th edn., Sage, London.
Department of Basic Education (DBE), 2014, Discipline summit – Discipline in schools, 
Government Printers, Pretoria.  
Durisic, M. & Bunijevac, M., 2017, ‘Parental involvement as an important factor in 
successful education’, C.E.P.S. Journal 7(3), 138–153.
Evans, R. & Cleghorn, A., 2014, ‘Parental perceptions: A case study of school 
choice amidst language waves’, South African Journal of Education 24(2), 1–17. 
https://doi.org/10.15700/201412071203
Gauteng Department of Education (GDE), 2018, Step–by–step admissions online 
application user guide for the 2019 learner intake, GDE, Johannesburg, viewed 15 
August 
2019, 
from 
https://www.gdeadmissions.gov.za/Content/Files/
LearnerAdmissionGuide.pdf.
Gauteng Department of Education (GDE), 2019, Regulations relating to the admission of 
learners in public schools Provincial Gazette No. 129, viewed 08 March 2020, from 
http://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:LBuTPQf1QgQJ:www.
gpwonline.co.za/Gazettes/Gazettes/85_18-3-2019_GautSeparate.
pdf+&cd=1&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=za.
Gomendio, M., 2017, Empowering and enabling teachers to improve equity and outcomes 
for all, international summit on the teaching profession, OECD Publishing, Paris.
Guest, G., MacQueen, K.M. & Namey, E.E., 2012, Applied thematic analysis, Sage, Los 
Angeles, CA.
Hamilton, L.S. & Guin, K., 2005, ‘Understanding how families choose schools’, in 
J.R. Betts & T. Loveless (eds.), Getting choice right: Ensuring equity and efficiency 
in education policy, pp. 40–60, Brookings Institute Press, Washington, DC.
Hegarty, S.,  1993, ‘Home school relations: a perspective from special education’, in 
P. Munn (ed.), Parents and schools: customers, managers or partners?, Routledge, 
London.
Heugh, K., 2002, ‘The case against bilingual and multilingual education in South 
Africa’, Perspectives in Education 20(1), 171–196.
Hirschman, A.O., 1970, Exit, voice, and loyalty: Responses to decline in firms, 
organizations, and states, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Hoadley, U.K., 1999, ‘School choice in a South African working-class context’, in Kenton-
SASE Conference, Kei River Mouth, Critical perspectives in South African education: 
Reconstituting the education realm, vol. 29, pp. 28–44, Juta, Cape Town.
Levin, J. & Milgrom, P., 2004, Introduction to choice theory, viewed 07 February 2018, 
from https://web.stanford.edu/~jdlevin/Econ%20202/Choice%20Theory.pdf.
Lipsky, E., Friedman, I.D. & Harkema, R., 2017, ‘Am I wearing the right hat? Navigating 
professional relationships between parent-teachers and their colleagues’, School 
Community Journal 27(1), 257–282.
Lombard, B.J.J., 2007, ‘Reasons why educator-parents based at township schools 
transfer their children from township schools to former Model C schools’, 
Education as Change 11(1), 43–57. https://doi.org/10.1080/16823200709487152
Maile, S., 2002, ‘School choice in South Africa’, Education and Urban Society 37(1), 
94–114. https://doi.org/10.1177/0013124504268279
Maree, K. (ed.), 2017, First steps in research, Van Schaik, Pretoria.
Moodley, R., 2019, ‘New school feeder zone regulations to ensure fair access’, SA 
News, 11 March, 2019, viewed 10 March 2020, from https://www.sanews.gov.za/
south-africa/new-school-feeder-zone-regulations-ensure-fair-access.
Moore, J.W., 2016, ‘What is the sense of agency and why does it matter?’, Frontiers in 
Psychology 7, 1272. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01272
Msila, V., 2009, ‘School and intra-township migration: Black parents scrambling for 
quality education in South Africa’, Journal of Education 46, 82–98.  
Neuman, A., 2018, ‘Criticism and education: Dissatisfaction of parents who 
homeschool and those who send their children to school with the education 
system’, Journal of Educational Studies 45(6), 726–741. https://doi.org/10.1080/0
3055698.2018.1509786
Ntekane, A., 2018, Parental involvement in education, North-West University, 
Vanderbijlpark.
Pampallis, J., 2003, ‘Education reform and school choice in South Africa’, in Choosing 
choice school choice in international perspective, pp. 143–163, Teachers College 
Press, New York, NY.
Parret, W. & Budge, K., 2016, How does poverty influence learning? Education equality, 
Edutopia, viewed 11 February 2018, from https://www.edutopia.org/blog/how-
does-poverty-influence-learning-william-parrett-kathleen-budge.
Plank, D.N. & Sykes, G., 2003, Choosing choice. School choice from an international 
perspective, Teachers College Press, New York, NY.
Spaull, N., 2013, South Africa’s education crisis: The quality of education in South Africa 
1994-2011, Report Commissioned by CDE, viewed 04 July 2019, from https://
www.semanticscholar.org/paper/South-Africa%27s-Education-Crisis%3A-The-
quality-of-in-Spaull/6e54309140a56d70af00335b5fdc4c4452235430.
Walter, E., 2012, ‘School choice increases student safety’, The Daily Signal, viewed 20 
March 2019, from https://www.dailysignal.com/2012/03/12/school-choice-
increases-student-safety.
Week, F.H., 2012, ‘The quest for a culture of learning: A South African schools 
perspective’, South African Journal of Education 32, 1–14. https://doi.
org/10.15700/saje.v32n1a565
Woolman, S. & Fleisch, B., 2006, ‘South Africa’s unintended experiment in school choice: 
How the National Education Policy Act, the South Africa Schools Act and the 
Employment of Educators Act create the enabling conditions for quasi-markets in 
schools’, 
Education 
and 
the 
Law 
18(1), 
31–75. 
https://doi.
org/10.1080/09539960600787317
Yin, R.K., 2018, Case study research and applications: Design and methods, 6th edn., 
Sage, Los Angeles, CA.
Zuilkowski, S.S., Piper, B., Ong’ele, S. & Kiminza, O., 2017, ‘Parents, quality and school 
choice: Why parents in Nairobi choose low-cost private schools over public 
schools in Kenya’s free primary education era’, Journal of Oxford Review of 
Education 44(2), 258–274. https://doi.org/10.1080/03054985.2017.1391084
