 
_ 1 
_ Poverty trends since the transition 
Poverty trends since the transition 
THE PERFORMANCE OF LOW FEE INDEPENDENT SCHOOLS 
IN SOUTH AFRICA – WHAT CAN AVAILABLE DATA TELL? 
 
SERVAAS VAN DER BERG, CHRIS VAN WYK, RONELLE BURGER, JANELI KOTZÉ, 
MARLIES PIEK & KATE RICH  
 
 
 
Stellenbosch Economic Working Papers: 01/17 
January 2017 
 
 
KEYWORDS: PUBLIC AND INDEPENDENT SCHOOLS, LOW FEE SCHOOLS 
JEL: I21, I24 
 
ReSEP (Research on Socio-Economic Policy),  
Department of Economics, University of Stellenbosch 
 
SERVAAS VAN DER BERG  
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMICS  
UNIVERSITY OF STELLENBOSCH  
PRIVATE BAG X1, 7602  
MATIELAND, SOUTH AFRICA  
SVDB@SUN.AC.ZA  
 
CHRIS VAN WYK  
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMICS  
UNIVERSITY OF STELLENBOSCH  
PRIVATE BAG X1, 7602  
MATIELAND, SOUTH AFRICA  
CHRISVAN WYK@SUN.AC.ZA 
 
JANELI KOTZÉ  
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMICS  
UNIVERSITY OF STELLENBOSCH  
PRIVATE BAG X1, 7602  
MATIELAND, SOUTH AFRICA  
JANELI.KOTZE@GMAIL.COM 
 
RONELLE BURGER  
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMICS  
UNIVERSITY OF STELLENBOSCH  
PRIVATE BAG X1, 7602  
MATIELAND, SOUTH AFRICA  
RBURGER@SUN.AC.ZA  
 
MARLIES PIEK 
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMICS  
UNIVERSITY OF STELLENBOSCH  
PRIVATE BAG X1, 7602  
MATIELAND, SOUTH AFRICA  
MARLIESR@SUN.AC.ZA  
 
KATE RICH 
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMICS  
UNIVERSITY OF STELLENBOSCH  
PRIVATE BAG X1, 7602  
MATIELAND, SOUTH AFRICA  
KATETAMARINRICH@GMAIL.COM  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A WORKING PAPER OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMICS AND THE  
BUREAU FOR ECONOMIC RESEARCH AT THE UNIVERSITY OF STELLENBOSCH 

THE PERFORMANCE OF LOW FEE INDEPENDENT SCHOOLS 
IN SOUTH AFRICA – WHAT CAN AVAILABLE DATA TELL? 
 
SERVAAS VAN DER BERG, CHRIS VAN WYK, RONELLE BURGER, JANELI KOTZÉ, 
MARLIES PIEK & KATE RICH 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
 
 
This study analysed grade 6 and grade 9 mathematics data from the Annual 
National Assessment by comparing school performance in public and independent 
schools in three geographical regions: Western Cape, Gauteng and South Africa 
as a whole. The aim was to see whether low-fee independent schools outperform 
public schools i) for schools which have similar school fees and ii) for schools 
which have similar resources, which is the sum of school fees and government 
subsidies.  
Our analysis indicates that independent primary schools, in all three geographical 
regions, are able to use resources more efficiently and are thus able to translate 
resources into better performance. However, when comparing schools in similar 
school fee brackets, the findings are mixed and vary by geographical area: 
sending a child to an independent primary school in Gauteng is worthwhile, 
whereas it is not worthwhile in the Western Cape. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
CONTENTS 
 
1. 
Introduction and background ............................................................................................................... 5 
2. 
Low fee independent schools in the international literature ............................................................... 7 
3. 
Low fee independent schools in South Africa ..................................................................................... 10 
3.1 
Size and contribution .................................................................................................................. 10 
3.2 
Subsidisation ............................................................................................................................... 12 
3.3 
Regulating and monitoring independent schools ....................................................................... 14 
4. 
Data and methodology ....................................................................................................................... 18 
4.1 
Data ............................................................................................................................................. 18 
4.2 
Methodology ............................................................................................................................... 21 
5. 
Empirical findings ................................................................................................................................ 23 
5.1 
Introduction to the empirical findings ........................................................................................ 23 
5.2 
Findings related to resources (school fees plus subsidies) ......................................................... 23 
5.3 
Findings related to school fees ................................................................................................... 24 
6. 
Summary and conclusions .................................................................................................................. 25 
7. 
References .......................................................................................................................................... 27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
List of Tables and Figures 
Table 1: Some rigorous estimates of the impact of private schools in developing countries ...................... 9 
Table 2: Racial composition of independent and public schools, 2012 ...................................................... 10 
Table 3: Subsidies per learner in ordinary public schools ........................................................................... 19 
Table 4: Registered independent schools in the Western Cape by school fee decile and participation in 
ANA, 2014 ................................................................................................................................................... 22 
 
Figure 1: Resources available per child in no fee schools, subsidised independent schools, fee-paying 
public schools and unsubsidised independent schools (fees only) ............................................................ 12 
Figure 2: Resources available per student in independent schools as percentage of resources in public 
schools ........................................................................................................................................................ 14 
Figure 3: Distribution of ANA Mathematics scores for public and independent school, all schools and 
quintile 8 and 9 schools only, 2012............................................................................................................. 20 
 
 
 
 
 

5 
1. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND 
In the context of South Africa’s failing school system, an important question is what options independent 
fee-paying schools can offer to parents who are willing to commit more private resources in order to 
improve their children’s chances of obtaining a good education. The quality of low fee independent 
schools is of considerable importance from the perspective of a parent in an impoverished community 
who values education and is willing and able to commit resources to sending their child to a better school. 
According to household surveys such parents appear to be exceptional, but not rare, constituting up to 
8% of parents living in poor communities. Such households make considerable sacrifices, yet anecdotal 
evidence suggests that these sacrifices often may not yield the envisaged benefits because the preferred 
school may not be significantly better than the default school. While the Annual National Assessments 
(ANA) can provide a basis to parents for comparing performance across schools (though there are issues 
with data quality), it is rarely used for such comparisons. Consequently, parents are often left with very 
little information to guide their pursuit of a better quality education for their child, leaving them to resort 
to basing their choice on a combination of rumour, stereotype and pragmatic considerations. 
Economic and organisational theory would suggest that independent schools may be able to provide 
better value for parents’ money than government schools. Teachers and principals at for-profit 
independent schools may for instance be more motivated due to better performance management at 
such schools, and non-profit independent schools may also succeed in attracting or recruiting principals 
and teaching staff with higher intrinsic motivation and commitment to the school’s mission. Additionally, 
the accountability relationships between parents and school staff are simpler and therefore likely to be 
more easily aligned in independent than in public schools. Organisational theory also suggests that the 
enhanced freedom of greater organisational independence in independent schools compared to state 
schools that are part of a large and sluggish government bureaucracy may promote customisation, client 
responsiveness and innovation and should help to facilitate tighter feedback and learning loops. An earlier 
report by the Centre for Development and Enterprise (CDE, 2010) provided some preliminary evidence to 
support this hypothesis. This study compared independent and public schools in six selected areas across 
three provinces, but it is not possible to ascertain whether differences in results could be driven primarily 
by private schools’ higher level of resources, the attraction of higher ability, more motivated or more 
affluent students, or better teaching.  
This study was undertaken to provide further information on whether there is systematic evidence that 
independent schools, or a substantial proportion of them, perform significantly better than comparable 
public schools in terms of cognitive outcomes. Ideally, a study was sought that would also indicate 
whether such better performance, if it happened to be found, was the result of greater resource 
availability, parent motivation, or school functionality. But from the outset it was clear that data issues 
may limit the ability to undertake such a sophisticated analysis and the research team cautioned that 
there were necessarily limitations to the results that can be obtained. Moreover, evidence from the USA 
on charter schools – which seem to offer some of the same potential gains from the use of incentives, 
accountability structures and management that one would hope for in South African independent schools 
– have not yielded strong evidence of enhanced performance, though recent results indicate that this may 
be because of a lag in performance improvement.  

6 
The study is in the first place an empirical one that attempts to determine how much evidence can be 
brought to bear from existing data on the relative performance of independent schools. However, a 
thorough survey of the international literature was also conducted as a background to this study, and it is 
summarised in Part 2, that deals with international evidence. Part 3 summarises the South African 
evidence, whilst Part 4 describes the data and the methodology adopted. The empirical findings are 
contained in Part 5, and Parts 6 deals with the summary and conclusions.  

7 
2. LOW FEE INDEPENDENT SCHOOLS IN THE INTERNATIONAL 
LITERATURE 
Many developing countries face chronically low levels of learning in the public schooling system. At the 
same time, developing countries have experienced a significant growth in private schooling within the last 
few decades. Between 1990 and 2010, enrolment in private primary schools as a percentage of total 
primary enrolments doubled from 11 percent to 22 percent in low-income countries. Private school 
enrolments now make up over 20 percent of total enrolments in more than 70 countries (Baum et al., 
2014:8). Private schools are often regarded as the preserve of the rich. However, a striking aspect of the 
growth in private schooling has been the proliferation of low-fee private schools serving relatively poor 
families. This has sparked significant debate over the role of such schools, with some decrying the 
privatisation of a function they think best left to the state, and others applauding the ability of the private 
sector to fill the gap created by the underperformance of the state schooling system. It has also inspired 
a growing body of research into the relative performance of private and public schools in developing 
countries. There is substantial evidence from both developed and developing countries that private school 
students perform better academically than their government school counterparts. However, private 
school students are also likely to be wealthier and come from a home background more conducive to 
academic success, so it is not immediately clear whether the observed better performance of private 
school students is due to the effect of private schooling itself or due to the effect of the characteristics 
associated with private school attendance. This section will review the literature on private schools in 
developing countries, focusing on the low-cost variety, and the attempts to estimate the true effect of 
private schooling on educational outcomes.  
One possible source of the better performance of learners in private schools than government schools in 
developing countries that is consistent with economic theory is that private schools provide principals and 
teachers with stronger incentives for good performance than in the public system. The remuneration 
structure for teachers in government schools is often fairly flat and dependent on teacher experience 
rather than effort or performance. Furthermore, it is difficult to fire publicly employed teachers, so there 
is limited threat of teachers losing their jobs because of poor performance. There is thus little incentive 
for good performance in government schools. In private schools, on the other hand, the survival of a 
school is dependent on parents continuing to send their children there. The school management has a 
strong incentive to ensure good performance, as they face the threat of parents removing their children 
from the school and losing the revenue from their fees. Private school teachers can also be fired much 
more easily, so they have a stronger incentive to work hard. School management thus has more control 
over teacher effort, and private schools are in theory more accountable to parents. 
The demand for private schooling is often driven by dissatisfaction with the quality of education available 
in the public system (push factors) as well as the perception that private schools offer a higher quality 
education and better life chances for children (pull factors). In interviews parents who send their child to 
a private school often mention high teacher absenteeism, low accountability and poor performance as 
some of the factors driving them away from the public system. Perceived greater accountability and better 
performance and, in some countries and contexts, instruction in English were among the factors attracting 
parents to private schools.  

8 
The international literature indicates that low-fee private schools usually employ younger, less 
experienced and less qualified (but sometimes more educated) teachers than government schools. These 
teachers are then usually paid far lower salaries than government school teachers. Nonetheless, private 
schools tend to have better teaching conditions than government schools, with lower pupil-teacher ratios, 
lower rates of teacher absenteeism, and greater teaching activity. Furthermore, there is substantial 
evidence from a range of countries that private school students achieve higher scores than those in 
government schools. The challenge is to determine whether these higher scores are merely due to private 
schools having a greater share of "good" students, or whether they reflect a true effect of attending a 
private school.  
A relatively small but growing literature has attempted to estimate the impact of low-fee private schools 
in developing countries, with the majority of such studies focusing on India. These studies use various 
econometric techniques to attempt to control for any ways in which private school students differ from 
government school students that are also related to education outcomes, such as home background, 
natural ability and parental motivation. Most studies have found at least some positive effect of attending 
a private school, though the effect sometimes differs by subject or location. The table below summarises 
some of the most rigorous estimates of the impact of private schools in developing countries. 
It appears from this table that the positive impact of private schools is quite widely encountered, but that 
this is far from universal, and that the effect sizes are not always very large. Many of these studies cannot 
wholly control for the effect of selection bias, i.e. that the children who attend such private schools end 
up there because they, or their parents, are different, in terms of motivation, resources or ability. It is thus 
difficult to know the counterfactual, i.e. how well they would have performed in public schools. Only the 
randomised control trials can in principle avoid this sample selection issue, though the other rigorous 
methods used in the studies summarised here all try to reduce this effect: by comparing students in 
private and public schools who are similar in many observed criteria (propensity score matching): by 
correcting for the observed dissimilarities between students (Heckman sample correction): or by 
controlling for students’ previous performance before they moved to private schools (fixed effects 
method).  
In many cases private schools are able to achieve similar or better results than government schools at a 
significantly lower cost. This is largely due to the fact that private school teachers in low income countries 
are usually paid much lower salaries, and suggests that private schools can be cost-effective. Nonetheless, 
a number of concerns have been raised regarding the proliferation of private schools. 
One of the criticisms levelled at private schooling is that because it is not free it favours the rich and thus 
promotes inequality. A related criticism is that it is unaffordable for the poor, and that families may have 
to make large sacrifices in order to send their children to private schools. The evidence suggests that while 
more affluent families are more likely to send their children to private schools, a substantial number of 
poor families are still able to access low-fee private schools. However, this does not necessarily mean that 
these schools are truly affordable for them. Several studies provide evidence that sending children to 
private schools takes up a large proportion of the income of poor households and may lead to them having 
to sacrifice spending on other necessary items, such as health. 
 
 

9 
Table 1: Some rigorous estimates of the impact of private schools in developing countries 
Study 
Country 
Method 
Size of effect 
Chudgar & Quin 
(2012) 
India 
Propensity score 
matching 
Reading: 0.22 (measured on a scale of 0-4) 
in rural sample, no effect in urban sample 
Writing & maths: no effect 
Thapa (2012) 
Nepal 
Propensity score 
matching 
10.56 percentage points 
Kingdon (1996) 
Uttar Pra-
desh, India 
Heckman two-step 
sample correction 
Maths: 1.42 points (out of 36) 
Reading: 0.04 points (out of 29). 
Desai et al. (2008) 
India 
Heckman two-step 
sample correction 
±0.25 Standard Deviations 
Desai et al. (2008) 
India 
Fixed effects 
±0.25 Standard Deviations 
French & Kingdon 
(2010) 
India 
Fixed effects 
0.17 Standard Deviations 
Javaid, Musaddiq & 
Sultan (2012) 
Pakistan 
Fixed effects 
0.038 Standard Deviations 
French & Kingdon 
(2010) 
India 
(Village-level) panel 
0.114 Standard Deviations 
Singh (2013) 
Andhra 
Pradesh, 
India 
Panel 
Urban areas: no effect 
Rural areas, 8-9 year olds: 
Vocabulary: 0.17 Standard Deviation 
English: 0.7 Standard Deviations 
Maths: no effect 
Telugu: negative effect 
Rural areas, 15 year olds: 
Vocabulary & Telugu: 0.12 Standard 
Deviations 
Maths: 0.2 Standard Deviations 
Andrabi et al. (2011) 
Punjab, 
Pakistan 
Dynamic panel 
0.25 Standard Deviations per year 
Angrist et al. (2002) 
Colombia 
Randomised 
evaluation 
0.2 Standard Deviations 
Muralidharan & 
Sundararaman 
(2013) 
Andhra 
Pradesh, 
India 
Randomised 
evaluation 
0.13 Standard Deviations overall 
Telugu & maths: no effect 
English: 0.12 Standard Deviations 
Social studies: 0.08 Standard Deviations 
Hindi: 0.55 Standard Deviations 
 
Another concern is the potential effect that the growth of private schools could have on government 
schools and the children who get left behind in the public system. The flight of middle class or more able 
children from the public school system to private schools may reduce the accountability of government 
schools and the pressure on them to improve, thus driving down the quality of government schools. It is 
rather difficult to evaluate this claim, but the limited available evidence offers no support for this notion. 

10 
3. LOW FEE INDEPENDENT SCHOOLS IN SOUTH AFRICA 
3.1 
Size and contribution 
There has been very limited South African research on low-fee independent schools. The existing 
literature is limited to descriptive analyses of the scope, growth and potential of South Africa’s low-fee 
independent school sector. As yet no studies have attempted a rigorous assessment of the relative 
effectiveness of South Africa’s low-fee independent schools.  
 The South African private school sector has grown rapidly from a low base in the last 15 years. According 
to official statistics summarised by Draper and Hofmeyr (2015:12), independent school enrolments grew 
from around 250 000 to 500 000 between 2000 and 2013. Hofmeyr et al. (2013:6) find that private school 
enrolment grew by 75.9% between 2000 and 2010 compared to only 1.4% in government schools. 
Moreover, Draper and Hofmeyr (2015:12) state that there has been a major demographic shift in the 
composition of the independent school sector, from being mainly white and serving the rich to being 
mainly black and the majority of schools now serving low- and middle-income learners. Indeed, an analysis 
of the DBE’s EMIS data confirms this, as shown in Table 2.  
Table 2: Racial composition of independent and public schools, 2012 
 
Black 
Coloured 
Indian 
White 
Other 
Total 
Independent 291 903 
24 805 
33 317 
113 860 
6 156 
470 041 
Public 
10 147 680 
956 824 
174 326 
507 262 
24 143 
11 810 235 
Total 
10 439 583 
981 629 
207 643 
621 122 
30 299 
12 280 276 
Independent 62.1% 
5.3% 
7.1% 
24.2% 
1.3% 
100% 
Public 
85.9% 
8.1% 
1.5% 
4.3% 
0.2% 
100% 
Total 
85.0% 
8.0% 
1.7% 
5.1% 
0.2% 
100% 
Source: Calculated from DBE’s Annual Survey of Schools 
According to official statistics there were 1681 registered independent schools in South Africa in 2014 
with 538 421 learners. Draper and Hofmeyr (2015:11) optimistically estimate that the true number of 
independent schools is probably much higher, at around 3500, as an unknown number of schools are 
unregistered and thus not counted in official statistics. However, this seems to be an over-estimate, 
considering that another Centre for Development and Enterprise (CDE) study found that less than a 
quarter of independent schools in operation in six poor areas were not registered (Schirmer, Johnston 
and Bernstein, 2010:6). The CDE estimates that in 2014 around 250 000 learners were enrolled in low-fee 
independent schools charging less than R12 000 per year (Draper and Hofmeyr, 2015:16). As will be shown 
later, a combination of regulation and limited state subsidisation makes it relatively unattractive for most 
parents in low income communities to choose to send their children to low fee independent schools, so 
this estimate too may be on the high side. 
The CDE’s 2010 survey of schools in six poor areas in three provinces (Gauteng, Limpopo and the Eastern 
Cape) sheds light on some characteristics of low-fee private schools in the country. Private schools had 

11 
smaller classes than public schools, but also had fewer facilities. They were located in a wide range of 
buildings, from abandoned factories and shacks to shopping centres. As in other countries, independent 
school teachers were paid much less than government teachers and had lower qualification levels. 
Nonetheless, private schools had much lower levels of teacher absenteeism (Schirmer, Johnston and 
Bernstein, 2010:6, 48). 
In 2014 registered private schools made up 6.5 percent of all South African schools, making South Africa’s 
private school sector small relative to those in many other developing countries. Moreover, South Africa’s 
private schools differ from those in other developing countries in that most low-fee South African private 
schools are not-for-profit and have substantially higher fees, and the majority of students are girls. The 
South African sector is also relatively highly regulated, but benefits from subsidisation, which is fairly 
uncommon in developing countries (Draper and Hofmeyr, 2015:10).  
There is very limited evidence on the performance of South African private schools. As part of the CDE’s 
survey of independent schools, a sample of Grade 6 private school learners were given achievement tests. 
The CDE found mixed evidence when comparing the achievement of private school learners to public 
school learners from the same area. In some areas private school students performed better, while in 
others government school learners had the advantage. However, the authors note that the test data for 
public school learners was potentially untrustworthy, and thus compare private school achievement with 
government school achievement in the National Systemic Evaluation of 2005 (three years prior to the 
survey). Using this data the achievement of private school students was 12 percent higher than 
government school students. A comparison of 2008 matric results for the sample of private schools and 
government schools in the same areas also suggests a private school advantage. 24 percent of learners at 
registered private schools received more than 60 percent in mathematics, compared to 10 percent at 
public schools that were not former Model C schools. The differences in results were similar for other 
subjects (Schirmer, Johnston and Bernstein, 2010:36-7). However, the present study is the first 
multivariate analysis which controls for differences in the resources available to government and 
independent schools in South Africa.  
Despite the rapid growth of independent schools in South Africa, there are concerns over their 
affordability for the poorest in South Africa. Low-fee schools in South Africa charge significantly higher 
fees than schools considered low-fee in other developing countries – in India low-fee private schools 
charge below R2000 per year, while in Kenya some low-fee schools charge as little as R360 a year. This 
may be because the costs facing private schools in South Africa are fairly high relative to other developing 
countries, which Draper and Hofmeyr (2015:11) ascribe inter alia to the sector being more regulated and 
thus having higher compliance costs, raising the relative cost particularly for low-fee schools (Draper and 
Hofmeyr, 2015:11). Thus while low-fee independent schools in South Africa are much more affordable 
than pricier schools, they remain unaffordable for the very poor (Hofmeyr et al., 2013:3, 10). It is said that 
low-fee private schools mainly serve the children of those who live in less affluent areas but have jobs, 
such as police officials and public school teachers (Schirmer, Johnston and Bernstein, 2010:39). This 
naturally places a limit on the growth of such schools. 

12 
3.2 
Subsidisation 
Average subsidies to public schools amounted to almost R12 000 in 2014. In accordance with the South 
African Schools Act of 1996, as amended, independent schools charging fees below around 2½ times the 
average in a province (around R30 000 per year if the average fee is taken to be R12 000 in 2014) are 
eligible for a per-learner government subsidy. In practice, however, independent schools in most 
provinces do not receive the subsidies that they are eligible for. Schools charging less than half the average 
public subsidy (roughly R6 000 per year in 2014) are eligible for a subsidy amounting to 60 percent of the 
provincial average estimate of expenditure per learner in government schools, i.e. R7 200, leaving some 
with net resources that could slightly exceed the amount available to no fee public schools, i.e. R13 200 
as against R12 000. Schools charging less than R12 000 may receive a 40 percent subsidy, R4 800, so that 
their actual resources could reach almost as high as R16 800. Schools with fees between R12 000 and 
R18 000, and those between R18 000 and R30 000, can obtain a 25 percent and 15 percent subsidy, 
respectively. Figure 1 shows the resources per child (subsidies paid by government as well as school fees) 
of independent schools over a range of school fees. These should be compared to the resources of public 
schools, which are for no-fee public schools simply R12 000 (assuming this to be the average amount), 
whilst for fee-paying public schools the amount would be R12 000 plus the value of the fee per child. It 
can be seen that across the range of fees, the resources available for public schools charging the same 
fees as their private school counterparts would be considerable more; from R30 000 fees and higher, this 
difference would amount to R12 000, i.e. the full extent of the public subsidy. At lower fees, of course, 
the difference is smaller. Looked at alternatively, from a school fee of R12 000 or more, private schools 
would have more resources than public schools.  
Figure 1: Resources available per child in no fee schools, subsidised independent schools, fee-paying 
public schools and unsubsidised independent schools (fees only) 
 
Source: Own calculations based on the subsidy formula set out in the SA Schools Act and assuming a public school subsidy per 
child of R12 000. Note that the horizontal line for the no fee public schools was added to show the level of public school 
subsidies; even though it is shown as if it applies at different school fee levels, though by definition such schools may not charge 
fees. 
R 0
R 10 000
R 20 000
R 30 000
R 40 000
R 50 000
R 60 000
R 0
R 5 000 R 10 000R 15 000R 20 000R 25 000R 30 000R 35 000R 40 000R 45 000R 50 000
Resources available per student
Fees paid
No fee public
Independent Fees + Subsidy
Public Fees + Subsidy
Fees only

13 
The CDE regards schools charging below R12 000 as low-fee schools and those charging between R12 000 
and R30 000 as mid-fee schools (Draper and Hofmeyr, 2015:13), though it may be argued that in the 
context of a middle income developing country these are somewhat high fees to justify those 
categorisations. Figure 2 shows the resources available per child in private schools expressed as a 
percentage of those in public schools if R12 000 is used as the value of the public school subsidy per child. 
Here, three cases can be distinguished: 
 
Relative to no fee public schools, registered private schools with fees of R4 800 or more who 
receive the appropriate subsidy have more resources in terms of school fees plus public subsidies 
(the top line). (For this line, the fees paid refer only to the private school fees, as such public 
schools have no fees.) 
 
As can be seen, the proportion of public school resources available per child in private schools 
initially peeks at a school fees of R6 000, where after the fall in the public subsidy percentage at 
various thresholds has a downward effect on this percentage until school fees rise beyond 
R20 000. (Shown in the line second from the top) 
 
 For unregistered independent schools, school resources per child remain below 60% of those in 
public schools charging the same fees until fees reach a level of R20 000 (bottom line of the 
graph). For fees of R12 000 or less, resources in public schools with similar fees are at least twice 
the resources available to private schools. For such private schools to survive would require that 
teachers be paid half or less than half of what teachers earn in public schools. If in addition the 
independent schools have smaller class sizes, this would mean that such schools would have even 
less than half the financial resources per child available than is the case in no fee public schools. 
(It is perhaps possible that a greater teaching load per teachers may reduce this deficit somewhat, 
but this can only happen to a limited extent). Considering that teacher costs constitute close to 
90% of the aggregate recurrent costs in public schools, this would require that such schools pay 
teachers less than half what they could earn in public schools, while there is a shortage of 
qualified teachers in many parts of the country. For very low fees school, e.g. with school fees of 
only R6000 per child, the resources available per child would be one third or even less of what is 
available in public schools charging similar fees. In a labour market where most qualified teachers 
do get a job, this must mean that such schools would largely have to draw on unqualified 
teachers. In that respect, for such low fees this could not be all that different from the situation 
in India, as described above. Also, from the perspective of parents, it would make little sense to 
send their children to schools that would costs them much more than public schools, even many 
fee-paying public schools, if they would simply get unqualified teachers. They are then likely to 
rather attend fee paying public schools, where these are available. 
 
 
 
 
 

14 
Figure 2: Resources available per student in independent schools as percentage of resources in public 
schools 
 
So unregistered, or unsubsidised (because of provincial failure to pay subsidies) schools are unlikely to be 
a major growth area, unless these unqualified teachers can do a much better job of teaching than is found 
in public schools, including low-fee public schools. The more likely growth area would be the registered 
independent schools, where growth is limited by the failure of some provinces to pay the subsidies that 
they are legislatively obligated to pay.  
To qualify for a subsidy, independent schools must attain certain minimum standards. Their average 
student performance in the Annual National Assessments and matric examinations must be equal to or 
better than the provincial average, or else schools could lose their subsidy for the subsequent year. 
Furthermore, independent schools are required to comply with a management checklist and to have 
audited financial statements in order to receive a subsidy. Independent schools may also have their 
accreditation refused or be deregistered if they fail to follow regulations and to attain sufficient standards 
for teachers and facilities. The requirements imposed on independent schools are thus much more 
stringent than those for government schools (Draper and Hofmeyr, 2015:14, Hofmeyr et al., 2013:15).  
3.3 
Regulating and monitoring independent schools  
When assessing the contribution of the regulatory environment of independent schools it is important to 
consider it as part of the wider institutional framework and specifically, a range of potential oversight 
mechanisms. 
 A school has at least four potential stakeholders that could fulfil an oversight role: firstly, the clients, 
which in this case are the parents because the children are minors; secondly, the funder, who would be a 
combination of government and the parents; thirdly, the regulator; and lastly, the owner. In the case of 
government schools the government would represent both the owner and the regulator. In the case of 
independent schools, there are two potential regulators: government and peer oversight bodies. Also, for 
the independent sector the organisational form may differ based on whether the owner is profit-seeking 
60%
110%
140%
175%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
140%
160%
180%
200%
R 0
R 5 000
R 10 000
R 15 000
R 20 000
Resources in private as % of in public 
schoolsResources available per student
Fees paid
Independent as % of fee-paying public schools
No subsidy as % of public
Independent as % of no fee

15 
or not profit-seeking and this will also influence the oversight and incentives provided to teachers and 
other staff members.  
Each of these stakeholders have their own weaknesses and blinds spots and therefore an ideal oversight 
framework is one where all stakeholders are present, have the right information to assess the 
performance of the school based on their perspective and interests and have mechanisms whereby they 
can reward the school for good performance or punish the school for poor performance to ensure that 
their assessment of the school performance counts. Unfortunately, this is often not the case.  
For instance, the literature shows that the ability of parents to monitor their child’s schooling and the 
performance of the school is widely varied and correlated with parental education. In South Africa, many 
parents of current learners have never attended a good school and hence have no frame of reference for 
what can be expected of a school. Furthermore, low self-esteem and social status can inhibit parents from 
speaking up or taking actions about their concerns. Due to the correlation with social status and education 
of the parents, one would therefore expect parental monitoring to be significantly worse in poor 
communities, which can be a channel for perpetuating low quality of education. Teachers teaching in poor 
communities may find it easier to underperform and not be called to account than teachers at middle 
class or affluent schools.  
While there is a notoriously large degree of variation in the performance of government schools – due 
partly to differences in fee contributions and parental involvement and monitoring – the variation in 
performance would be presumed to be far greater in the independent sector for at least two reasons. 
Firstly, because the independent sector is more fragmented and individual than the government system; 
and secondly, because the most informal and low-cost independent sector schools are subject to minimal 
scrutiny because they would often not have the bureaucracy in place to be part of the government’s 
monitoring framework and would not be able to afford to join the independent sector’s peer oversight 
bodies, or have little incentive to do so. Such schools will remain a worry as long as these regulatory 
loopholes exist. Little information exists about such schools and that is a part of the problem.  
If such schools are for-profit organisations that serve parents who understand the value of education and 
are willing to make substantial personal sacrifices to buy such an education for their children, but have 
little basis to choose a good school due to their own lack of exposure to quality schooling, then such 
loopholes may be even more worrying. This is a segment of the independent school sector that requires 
more research and more regulation. Anecdotal evidence in news media reports children having to rise 
daily at 4 am or 5 am to take a bus or a train to a better school far away from the poor community where 
they live. Such transport costs would often represent a significant additional burden to the family – and if 
they are attending an independent school, the fees would impose a further financial burden. From a public 
policy perspective it is vital to provide more information on the quality of schools to guide parents in their 
choices so as to ensure that these household sacrifices are not made in vain. 
On the other hand, there are concerns about both the efficacy of independent school regulation and the 
burden imposed by the current regulation. Independent schools subjected to government regulation 
complain about the frequent reporting, various quality assurance processes and numerous compliance 
requirements and argue that such demands could be counterproductive, excluding smaller schools that 
need the subsidy more badly. To operate as a registered independent school and receive a state subsidy, 

16 
a school must successfully navigate three application processes, each with their own set of requirements, 
each differing across provinces.  
Firstly, an independent school is required to register with the department of education in the province in 
which it is situated. Even though this occurs within common national legislation, the National Schools Act, 
each province lays down their own conditions of registration and implements these regulations with 
varying levels of intensity, but commonly an application for registration is made to the Head of 
Department of the appropriate province, accompanied by a long list of supporting documentation.1 The 
legislation in both the Western Cape and Gauteng has clear time lines defined for the approval of the 
registration of an independent school, and in both these provinces the application for registration of an 
independent school is said to be approved within 3 months from the date of receipt of application. This, 
however, is not the case in all provinces, with the KwaZulu-Natal legislation for example, not mentioning 
any commitments from government’s side to timeously consider the application for registration of an 
independent school. Regardless of the province in which an application has been made, the perception is 
that the extensive application process for registration has often caused unreasonably long delays in 
obtaining registration (Centre for Development and Enterprise , 2010). Once the application for 
registration has been approved, a school will be granted an Educational Management Information 
Systems (EMIS) number as proof of registration.  
Secondly, in order to receive a state subsidy, not-for-profit schools have to go through another application 
process, once they are registered with the province and has been operational for at least one full academic 
year. A state subsidy can range from 15 to 60 per cent of the average cost per child in an ordinary public 
school in the relevant province, and is dependent on the school meeting a set of requirements as 
determined by provincial minister. These requirements vary by province, and proving compliance to these 
requirements can become quite burdensome in some provinces.  
Finally, all independent schools also need to be registered with the quality assurance council, Umalusi. 
This requirement has come into effect in 2008 through the General and Further Education and Training 
Quality Assurance (GEFTQA) Amendment Act and states that a school is not operating legally if not 
accredited or seeking accreditation from Umalusi. Umalusi, however, has been slow in implementing the 
accreditation process, which has led to further delays in the registration of independent schools.  
The varying capacity within provincial departments means that the regulations and processes have been 
implemented with different degrees of intensity and efficacy. Inefficiencies at the provincial level have 
often resulted in schools struggling to register, and in subsidies not being provided, being paid late, or 
being cut without any communication from the provincial department. These factors create a disabling 
environment by undermining the rights of independent schools to their state benefits and thereby 
                                                          
1 The list includes: 1) The constitution of the school covering all matters relating to the control of the school, including ownership, 
character, aims, governance, funding and the language and admission policy; 2) A floor and site plan, as well as details of the 
facilities for the implementation of the curriculum, as well as for co-curricular and extra-curricular activities; 3) Details of the 
facilities which will be made available to serve the needs of learners with disabilities; 4) A certified copy of a valid certificate of 
occupancy; 5) A certified copy of a valid certificate from the relevant health authorities confirming that the proposed facilities at 
the independent school will meet the minimum health and safety requirements; 6) A certified copy of a valid certificate from the 
relevant municipality confirming that the proposed facilities will meet the requirements of the municipal by laws; 7) A proposed 
list of educators with their qualifications and their South African Council for Educators (SACE) registration numbers; 8) Proof that 
the school will be financially viable for at least 12 months after registration. 

17 
endangering the existence of low fee independent schools (Hofmeyer, et al., 2013). The poor regulations, 
however, also allow for some independent schools to escape detection and remain unregistered. These 
schools, however, will not be eligible for a state subsidy.  
The research team’s efforts in obtaining data from the various departments of education has been 
instructive regarding the capacity of the various directorates of independent schools across provinces. In 
the Gauteng Department of Education it was nearly impossible to make an appointment with the Director 
of Independent Schools, and conversations with various officials in the Independent Schools directorate 
seemed to indicate that no electronic database of all registered independent schools existed and that all 
the information was only available on the application forms submitted by the various schools. However, 
the Research Co-ordination Unit managed to provide the team with all the necessary information within 
minutes. In KwaZulu-Natal, too, it proved to be nearly impossible to make contact with the Director of 
Independent Schools or with any of the officials in the Directorate.  
The problems encountered in attempting to access data from these government divisions cast doubt on 
government’s understanding that the private sector can be an important ally. While the independent 
sector is currently small, it has been expanding and the problems relating to poor government regulation 
are therefore set to increase in scale and seriousness. With high unemployment levels, it is worrying that 
there are relatively few entry barriers and few punitive measures to prevent profit-seeking entrepreneurs 
and extorting money from well-meaning but uneducated and vulnerable parents who are eager to provide 
a bright future for their children.  

18 
4. DATA AND METHODOLOGY 
4.1 
Data 
This study set out to use mainly existing data sources and concentrate on a comparison of public schools 
and registered independent schools in the Western Cape and Gauteng, but eventually the analysis was 
also extended beyond this to the national level. Also, the initial intention was to focus on primary schools 
only, where larger numbers make it possible to obtain better estimates of the possible statistical 
relationship between school type and performance, but the availability of secondary school data at the 
national level was also used to extend the analysis to secondary schools. Existing data on registered 
independent schools is sparse and uneven across provinces. This provides further motivation for 
concentrating on the Western Cape and Gauteng. The interest is in the schools attended by poorer 
children, i.e. independent schools that would be affordable to households in poor communities.  
The Annual National Assessments of 2012 were used to measure school performance, with the focus on 
Grade 6 Mathematics in primary schools, and Grade 9 Mathematics in secondary schools. Using Home 
Language rather than Mathematics gave similar results but a poorer fit in the regression analyses, 
indicating that there is more noise in this data, a result that echoes previous analyses. In the Western 
Cape, permission was also obtained to use the Systemic School Evaluations carried out in this province 
only (independent schools have only recently started participating in these tests), but these are closely 
correlated to the ANA results (Van der Berg, 2015) and data analysis showed it did not offer any different 
insights that warranted treating the Western Cape differently from other provinces; also, the small sample 
size of independent schools in this data set limited its usefulness. Similarly, matric results were also used 
as outcome variable at secondary school, but again did not give a clearer picture and the fact that many 
children drop out before matric means that an important part of school performance is then ignored. 
The WCED also agreed to provide their database on fees paid by independent schools (as this is used for 
determining subsidies to low fee independent schools, it is likely that some of the data would under-
report the effective costs to parents of their children attending such schools). Much time was spent trying 
to obtain further data on fees of independent schools (see the section on regulation above), with limited 
success, though the Gauteng school fee data could eventually be obtained. For both independent and 
public schools, the school fee data obtained from the national DBE system was of poor quality, and much 
work had to go into cleaning and verifying this data, though even after that some uncertainty remained. 
For instance, where official school fee data for different years fluctuated greatly, decisions had to be taken 
on what values to use that were more credible, and inflation adjustments had to be made across years 
where data was missing for 2014, the year for which most school fee data could be obtained. The Western 
Cape school fee data appears to be the most accurate of those the team could obtain, followed by that 
for Gauteng. 
Data on aggregate school resources, or costs, was obtained from adding the subsidies per child obtained 
from the provincial departments to the fees obtained from parents that were discussed above. The 
provincial data on the subsidy per child in public schools that could be obtained was that in Table 3. 

19 
Table 3: Subsidies per learner in ordinary public schools 
 
Calculated 
from 
audited 
figures 
2012/14 
Inflation adjustment to 2014 
 
Primary schools 
Secondary schools Primary schools 
Secondary schools 
Western Cape 
R11 292 
R12 003 
R 11 939 
R 12 691 
Gauteng 
R10 657 
R12 072 
R 11 268 
R 12 764 
Eastern Cape 
R5 971 
R23 146 
R 12 513 
R 12 200 
Free State 
R12 534 
R13 202 
R13 252 
R 13 957 
Kwazulu-Natal 
R11 419 
R10 985 
R12 073 
R 11 615 
Limpopo 
R11 122 
R12 534 
R11 759 
R 13 252 
Mpumalanga 
R12 625 
R10 840 
R13 348 
R 11 451 
Northern Cape 
R12 938 
R10 758 
R13 679 
R 11 374 
Northwest 
R12 090 
R9 915 
R12 783 
R 10 483 
Note: The obvious discrepancy in the Eastern Cape is probably based on an inaccurate allocation between primary and 
secondary schools and expenditures. Thus the average national figures were used for that province in 2014 in the data. 
Subsidies for independent schools in the data were calculated using the formula based on the SA Schools 
Act that was discussed earlier to the public school subsidy levels in the table. The assumption had to be 
made that these subsidies are actually paid, something that apparently is fairly certain in the two 
provinces studied, but not in others. Thus it is not surprising that the results for the national datasets 
provided less statistically significant coefficients, as will be seen later. 
Figures 3a to 3h show the kernel density distributions of the average mathematics scores in Grade 6 or 9 
for public and independent schools. In each of the four data samples (Western Cape primary, Gauteng 
primary, SA primary and SA secondary), a graph of the full sample is shown first, i.e. including schools in 
the top decile of the distribution of school fees in that sample, and next to it a graph containing only 
deciles 8 and 9 for the sample in question. Kernel densities are in essence similar to smoothed histograms, 
thus making interpretation of the vertical axis difficult, but they allow better comparison for two or more 
sub-samples than do histograms. The important thing to focus on is where the bulk of the distribution lies, 
with the mode (the top point in the graph) of particular interest. 
Before controlling for school fees, i.e. for the full samples, it is to be expected that independent schools 
would fare better, as a greater proportion of their learners would be likely to be from higher socio-
economic backgrounds. However, when confining the analysis to particular deciles (as in all the graphs on 
the right), some of the heterogeneity in socio-economic background is reduced, so it is less clear whether 
private or public schools would perform best. In all but one of the graphs, the mode for independent 
schools lies to the right of that for public schools, indicating that in most cases independent schools 
performed better than public schools in the ANA Mathematics tests. The exception is for quintile 8 and 9 
in the Western Cape, where the relatively small number of independent schools captured in the data 
performed worse than the public schools in the same school fee deciles. The regression analysis in the 
next section will confirm that the Western Cape is an outlier in terms of the relative performance of public 
schools.  
 
 

20 
Figure 3: Distribution of ANA Mathematics scores for public and independent school, all schools and 
quintile 8 and 9 schools only, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
.01
.02
.03
0
20
40
60
80
100
Gr 6 Maths Score (%)
Independent
Public
kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 9.7957
Western Cape
0
.01
.02
.03
20
40
60
80
100
Gr 6 Maths score (%)
Independent
Public
kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 6.1416
Western Cape: Quintiles 8 & 9
0
.01
.02
.03
0
20
40
60
80
100
Gr 6 Maths score (%)
Independent
Public
kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 5.3594
Gauteng Primary schools
0
.005
.01
.015
.02
.025
20
40
60
80
100
Gr 6 Maths score (%)
Independent
Public
kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 6.1436
Gauteng Primary Schools in Quintiles 8 & 9
0
.01
.02
.03
0
20
40
60
80
100
gr6maths2012percentage
Independent
Public
kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 5.1190
SA primary schools
0
.01
.02
.03
0
20
40
60
80
100
gr6maths2012percentage
Independent
Public
kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 8.4952
SA quintile 8 & 9 primary schools
0
.02
.04
.06
.08
.1
0
20
40
60
80
gr9maths2012percentage
Independent
Public
kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 4.3045
SA secondary schools
0
.02
.04
.06
.08
.1
0
20
40
60
80
gr9maths2012percentage
Independent
Public
kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 3.8551
SA quintile 8 & 9 secondary schools

21 
4.2 
Methodology 
The intention with the analysis was to investigate how the performance of public schools and independent 
schools in the same fee bracket compare (i.e. relevant from the view point of the parents wanting to make 
an investment in their child’s education). For this purpose the study uses education production functions 
(multivariate regressions) to estimate to what extent available resource constraints and socio-economic 
factors may explain possible differences in performance between these two groups of schools. As the full 
data set also includes schools that are clearly not low fee, the analysis is initially run for a full model in 
each of the four sets of estimates that are attempted: For Western Cape primary schools, Gauteng primary 
schools, South African primary schools and then also South African secondary schools (sample size 
prevented an analysis of secondary schools at provincial level). 
Once the data had been obtained, descriptive analyses were first undertaken. Because of uncertainty 
about the school fee data in particular, it was decided, in line with the initial outline for this study, to 
concentrate the analysis on the Western Cape and to a lesser extent Gauteng, and then to do some initial 
work on the national data to see whether it could add to understanding. The data analysis was made more 
difficult by the fact that only a small sample of independent schools both did have school fee data that 
could be used and participated in the cognitive tests that were used as outcome measures. Furthermore, 
because not all provinces pay the subsidies to independent schools that they quality for, the overall 
resources (school fees plus public subsidy) per school that were calculated based on the assumed 
subsidies may not be accurate for schools outside of the Western Cape and Gauteng. 
The nature of the data limitations to obtain good estimates of the association between fees or costs and 
school performance for low fee schools can perhaps be best appreciated by the following table, setting 
out the number of independent schools in each decile of the distribution of school fees and the number 
of such schools for which ANA (performance) data are also available. Note the very small number of 
registered independent schools in the Western Cape that were not amongst the more expensive schools 
(the top decile of schools by school fees). 
The data limitations can be gauged from the fact that, outside of the top decile of schools by school fee 
in each of the samples, there are only 11 primary independent schools in the Western Cape with ANA 
data, 120 in Gauteng, and 41 in the South African primary sample (note that the deciles are calculated for 
each sample separately). For the national secondary school sample, only 25 independent schools could 
be used outside of the top decile. 
The regression models were run with only two other control variables, enrolment and whether the school 
is located in an urban area. In themselves, these control variables are not of interest but they were purely 
added to reduce what may have been spurious correlation due to these variables being left out. The 
functional form for both the school fees and the resources (“costs”, i.e. fees plus subsidies) that gave the 
best fit were found to be obtained with a log form and a square of the log of the variable. Although the 
impact of school fees and resources is of interest, the main interest here is the direction and the statistical 
significance of the dummy for a school being independent. This will be discussed in the next section. 
 
 
 

22 
Table 4: Registered independent schools in the Western Cape by school fee decile and participation in 
ANA, 2014 
 
 
Minimum 
school fees 
Public schools 
Independent 
schools 
Independent 
schools 
that 
participated in ANA 
Western Cape 
Deciles 1 to 4 
R0 
544 
0 
0 
Decile 5 
R15 
105 
2 
1 
Decile 6 
R266 
119 
1 
0 
Decile 7 
R440 
122 
7 
1 
Decile 8 
R1 464 
108 
25 
7 
Decile 9 
R6 090 
97 
27 
2 
Decile 10 
R13 500 
27 
101 
20 
Total 
 
1 122 
163 
31 
Gauteng 
Deciles 1 to 4 
R0 
768 
0 
0 
Decile 5 
R9 
137 
28 
10 
Decile 6 
R1 208 
132 
51 
15 
Decile 7 
R4560 
67 
119 
58 
Decile 8 
R14 860 
85 
101 
30 
Decile 9 
R35 742 
114 
72 
7 
Decile 10 
R28 489 
125 
60 
4 
Total 
 
1 428 
431 
124 
National primary 
Deciles 1 to 7 
R0 
14 838 
2 
1 
Decile 8 
R15 
332 
8 
2 
Decile 9 
R301 
1 784 
114 
38 
Decile 10 
R5497 
1 153 
744 
262 
Total 
 
18 107 
868 
303 
National secondary 
Deciles 1 to 7 
R0 
8 079 
0 
0 
Decile 8 
R15 
288 
21 
2 
Decile 9 
R650 
830 
216 
23 
Decile 10 
R11 500 
493 
555 
98 
Total 
 
9 690 
792 
123 
 
 

23 
5. EMPIRICAL FINDINGS 
5.1 
Introduction to the empirical findings 
The poor quality of the data limits the confidence that one could have in the results, even beyond the 
normal testing of statistical confidence that such regressions analyses habitually report. Also, statistical 
significance is limited by the small sample size, particularly of low fee independent schools, which are the 
central focus of this report, and by a lot of heterogeneity in performance. As indicated, this small sample 
size is the result of limited numbers of registered independent schools, the lack of school fee and ANA 
data for these schools, and the small number of them that charge low fees. 
Despite these limitations, the statistical results are not completely disappointing. Regressions results are 
shown in Appendix Table 1, with the dependent variable being the average performance in the 2014 ANA 
in Grade 6 Mathematics for primary schools, and for secondary schools the performance in the Grade 9 
ANA. The results are presented for three geographic areas, the Western Cape, Gauteng, and all of South 
Africa, in declining order of the accuracy of the school fee data. For the two provinces concerned, the 
number of observations available for secondary schools did not allow for an analysis at secondary school 
level, so secondary school results are only shown for all of South Africa. However, as indicated, if some 
provinces do not pay the subsidies to independent schools, the national data may be less accurate, as it 
had to be assumed that all schools are subsidised according to the official formula. 
Two sets of results are generated, one to determine the association between school fees and performance 
(the top half of the page), the other that between financial resources available per child (school fees plus 
subsidies) and school performance (the bottom half). The models are in each case first run for all schools, 
then the richest decile of schools (judged by school fees) are dropped, and subsequently also the second 
richest decile. Ideally rich schools should not have been considered at all, but in order to have more stable 
estimates, it is not always sensible to only consider model results for low fee schools. In all models, 
controls for whether the school is urban or not, and for enrolment are added. 
Finally, when considering the results presented below, it is imperative to consider that these results do 
not show causal effects. The reason, as discussed in the early parts of this report, is that it is simply 
uncertain to what extent the selection of students into independent schools is non-random in terms of 
their ability, socio-economic background and motivation, and parental effort to support them. That being 
the case, it may well be that students performing better in independent schools than in public schools 
may not be the results of the schools, but of the selection process. It is not possible with the available 
data to set up a counter-factual of how the same students would have performed in the other part of the 
system, thus the causal effects of the schools cannot be determined.  
5.2 
Findings related to resources (school fees plus subsidies) 
The results for resources (‘costs”), in the bottom panel of Appendix Table 1, are discussed first. The 
provincial models generally fit better than the national ones, with R-squares ranging from 0.12 to 0.48. 
For both Gauteng and the Western Cape, the dummy for independent schools is positive and statistically 
significant in all three models, and this also applies for two of the models for primary schools at a national 

24 
level, though the third, which considers lower fee schools, has a dummy that is large, significant and 
negative. At secondary level there is no significant statistical evidence either way.  
Thus the provincial results show that in the Western Cape and Gauteng, independent schools perform 
better with the same – public plus private – financial resources than public schools, or put differently, they 
require fewer resources to obtain similar results. This can be summarised as “independent schools use 
resources more efficiently”, but only the affluent ones amongst them have similar resources as fee-paying 
public schools, given how the public subsidies for independent schools function. If actual public subsidies 
of independent schools are smaller than indicated, this would further strengthen this finding. 
5.3 
Findings related to school fees 
In primary schools in the Western Cape, the regression results indicate that independent schools do not 
perform as well as public schools that charge the same school fees. The independent school dummy is 
negative in all three and significant in two of the three the models for the Western Cape, indicating that 
this finding holds if we consider all schools in the province, but also when the model is run without the 
highest costs schools; the result loses its significance if the top two deciles are excluded, perhaps in part 
because of the small independent school sample that then remains. Thus independent schools in the 
Western Cape that they do not consistently provide as good results in ANA Maths Gr6 as public schools 
charging the same school fees, consistent with Figure 3b discussed before – this can be summarised as 
“In the Western Cape, independent schools do not bring parents value for money”. However, when the 
analysis excludes affluent (Quintile 10) schools, this result does not consistently hold. The high R-squared 
in the Western Cape indicates that there is a relatively strong relationship between performance and fees, 
in particular though the other regressors also play a role. 
It is instructive to see, though, that the sign of the relationship turns around for all three the Gauteng 
primary school models, and that this relationship is significant in all cases, with both the magnitude of the 
effect and the strength of the relationship rising as more schools at the top end are excluded. It appears 
to show strong evidence that lower fee independent schools in Gauteng provide better results than public 
schools charging similar fees. This indeed implies that “In Gauteng, independent schools provide parents 
with better value for money”, even despite the fact that the resources at their disposal are less than 
those in public schools, due to the reduced subsidies. 
At a national level, the results are less clear, be it at primary or secondary level. Only in the case of the full 
national primary sample is the dummy for independent schools significant, and in that case, the sign is 
negative, as in the Western Cape. But the sign changes around much and the results lose significance in 
the reduced sample models. At the secondary level too, the signs are inconsistent and the results 
insignificant. The last five models shown all have exceedingly low R-squares, indicating that much of the 
variation in performance cannot be explained by the models. 
 

25 
6. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 
This study has set out to determine whether independent schools perform better than public schools with 
similar fees, or public schools with similar resources.  
For school fees, the findings are mixed: In Western Cape, in all three models, independent schools do not 
perform as well as public schools with similar school fees, i.e. parents do not get as much value for money 
in independent as in public schools. This finding also holds for the national sample of primary schools, but 
is only significant for the full sample. In contrast, in Gauteng all three models show a positive effect on 
performance of being in independent schools relative to public ones, i.e. parents do get value for money 
considering the school fees they pay. 
Regarding the performance relative to the resource used, the results are more unanimous: Independent 
schools use resources better, in terms of achieving higher performance with similar resources, or put 
differently, requiring fewer resources to achieve similar results as public schools.  
The results obtained show that independent schools do use resources more sparingly than public schools, 
even though they may not always bring parents value for money. From the perspective of society, if the 
results found here would also have held if there was no selection effect (i.e. if they are interpreted 
causally), they can be considered as saving the state money to achieve the same level of cognitive 
outcomes, or alternatively, achieving higher cognitive outcomes with similar resources (both subsidies 
and fees). 
Also, if the results are interpreted as at least in part causal, they are likely to stem from the organisational 
aspects. As indicated in the introduction to this report, economic and organisational theory suggests that 
the advantage of independent schools may relate to teacher and principals motivation, or that 
accountability relationships between parents and school staff are simpler and therefore more easily 
aligned in such schools. Organisational theory also suggests that greater organisational independence may 
promote customisation, client responsiveness and innovation and should help to facilitate tighter 
feedback and learning loops. 
An analysis of the fees and resources of the different school types (no fee public, fee-paying public, 
registered and subsidy-receiving independent schools, and unsubsidised, usually unregister independent 
schools) gives some interesting pointers to the likely growth of the independent school sector. It is likely 
that unregistered independent schools will remain relatively small in number, as the resources they can 
gain from school fees alone are relatively insubstantial, thus they will remain compelled to pay teachers 
far less, and therefore largely having to appoint unqualified teachers, often on short term contracts. That 
is also likely to undermine their performance and thus their attractiveness to parents. Registered public 
schools, on the other hand, may show more growth, particularly as disillusion with the quality of public 
schooling rises. However, if provinces avoid their obligation to pay subsidies to such school and continue 
to place obstacles in the way of schools attempting to register, their growth may be stifled. Also, the 
subsidy formula is not very supportive of the growth of such independent schools in competition with 
public ones that get far more state subsidies, but at least the availability of such subsidies in South Africa 
is a positive factor that has had an important influence on the growth of the independent school sector.  
However, given the limited information available to parents and the fact that many parents are poorly 

26 
equipped to judge the quality of schooling their children receive, proper regulation of the sector is needed, 
but should not create bureaucratic obstacles. 
Considering the limited causal inferences that can be drawn from a study of this nature, it is pertinent also 
to consider what further research may be necessary to get a better understanding of both the impact of 
independent schools and the reasons for that impact. This will require a much larger study, including 
additional data gathering (e.g. own testing of pupils, testing of teachers, information on recruitment and 
management of teachers, number of teachers, management, classroom practices). This will increase both 
the cost and the duration of such a project. Specifically, it would be important to investigate where the 
independent school advantage originates, i.e. what role does management, more teacher motivation or 
teacher knowledge play? Further analysis could also provide leverage for influencing government policy 
making – both in terms of identifying bottlenecks and weaknesses in the public school sector and also in 
proposing more support and scope for making a growing independent school sector.  
 
 

27 
7. REFERENCES 
Akaguri, L. 2011. Quality low-fee private schools for the rural poor: perception or reality? Evidence from 
southern Ghana. CREATE Pathways to Access Research Monograph No. 69.  
Akaguri, L. 2014. Fee-free public or low-fee private basic education in rural Ghana: how does the cost 
influence the choice of the poor? Compare: A Journal of Comparative and International Education, 
44(2): 140-161.  
Altonji, J. G., Elder, T. E. & Taber, C. R. 2005. Selection on observed and unobserved variables: assessing 
the effectiveness of Catholic schools. Journal of Political Economy, 113(1): 151-184.  
Andrabi, T., Das, J. & Khwaja, A. I. 2008. A dime a day: the possibilities and limits of private schooling in 
Pakistan. Comparative Education Review, 52(3): 329-355. 
Andrabi, T., Das, J., Khwaja, A. I. & Zajonc, T. 2011. Do value-added estimates add value? Accounting for 
learning dynamics. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(3): 29-54. 
Angrist, J., Bettinger, E. & Kremer, M. 2006. Long-term educational consequences of secondary school 
vouchers: evidence from administrative records in Colombia. American Economic Review, 96(3): 
847-862. 
Angrist, J., Bettinger, E., Bloom, E., King, E. & Kremer, M. 2002. Vouchers for private schooling in Colombia: 
evidence from a randomized natural experiment. American Economic Review, 92(5): 1535-1558. 
Aslam, M. 2009. The relative effectiveness of government and private schools in Pakistan: are girls worse 
off? Education Economics, 17(3): 329-354. 
Barrera-Osorio, F., Blakeslee, D. S., Hoover, M., Linden, L. L., Raju, D. & Ryan, S. 2013. Leveraging the 
private sector to improve primary school enrolment: evidence from a randomized controlled trial 
in Pakistan. Working Paper. Available: https://www.rise.ox.ac.uk/sites/www.rise.ox.ac.uk/ 
files/7_Barrera_pprs_pakistan_working_paper.pdf  
Baum, D., Lewis, L., Lusk-Stover, O. & Patrinos, H. 2014. What matters most for engaging the private sector 
in education: A framework paper. Washington, DC: World Bank.  
Chudgar, A. & Quin, E. 2012. Relationship between private schooling and achievement: results from rural 
and urban India. Economics of Education Review, 31(4): 376-390.  
Desai, S., Dubey, A., Vanneman, R. & Banerji, R. 2008. Private schooling in India: a new educational 
landscape. India Human Development Survey Working Paper No. 11. 
Draper, K. & Hofmeyr, J. 2015. Low-fee private schools: international experience and South African 
realities. Johannesburg: Centre for Development and Enterprise.  
French, R. & Kingdon, G. 2010. The relative effectiveness of private and government schools in rural India: 
evidence from ASER data. Department of Quantitative Social Science Working Paper No. 10-03. 
Goyal, S. & Pandey, P. 2009. How do government and private schools differ? Findings from two large 
Indian states. Washington, DC: World Bank.  
Goyal, S. 2009. Inside the house of learning: the relative performance of public and private schools in 
Orissa. Education Economics, 17(3): 315-327. 
Härmä, J. 2009. Can choice promote Education for All? Evidence from growth in private primary schooling 
in India. Compare: A Journal of Comparative and International Education, 39(2): 151-165. 
Härmä, J. 2013. Access or quality? Why do families living in slums choose low-cost private schools in Lagos, 
Nigeria? Oxford Review of Education, 39(4): 548-566.  
Hofmeyr, J., McCarthy, J., Oliphant, R., Schirmer, S. & Bernstein, A. 2013. Affordable private schools in 
South Africa. Johannesburg: Centre for Development and Enterprise.  
Javaid, K., Musaddiq, T. & Sultan, A. 2012. Prying the private school effect: an empirical analysis of learning 
outcomes of public and private schools in Pakistan. Lahore: University of Management 
Kingdon, G. 1996. The quality and efficiency of private and public education: a case study of urban India. 
Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 58(1): 57-82.  

28 
KwaZulu-Natal School Education Act, 1996 (Act 3 of 1996). Notice regarding the registration and payment 
of subsidies to independent schools. Pietermaritzburg. 
Lewin, K. M. 2007. The limits to growth of non-government private schooling in Sub-Saharan Africa. 
CREATE Pathways to Access Research Monograph No. 5.  
Muralidharan, K. & Kremer, M. 2009. Public and private schools in rural India. In School Choice 
International: Exploring Public-Private Partnerships. R. Chakrabarti & P. Peterson, Eds. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press. 
Muralidharan, K. & Sundararaman, V. 2013. The aggregate effect of school choice: evidence from a two-
stage experiment in India. NBER Working Paper No. 19441. 
Schirmer, S., Johnston, S. & Bernstein, A. 2010. Hidden assets: South Africa’s low-fee private schools. 
Johannesburg: Centre for Development and Enterprise. 
Singh, A. 2013. Size and sources of the private school premium in test scores in India. Young Lives Working 
Paper 98.  
South African Schools Act, 1996 (Act 84 of 1996). Notice for the registration and subsidy of independent 
schools. Pretoria. 
Thapa, A. 2012. Public and private school performance in Nepal: an analysis using the SLC examination. 
Education Economics, 23(1): 47-62. 
Tooley, J. & Dixon, P. 2006. ‘De facto’ privatisation of education and the poor: implications of a study from 
sub‐Saharan Africa and India. Compare: A Journal of Comparative and International Education, 
36(4)443-462. 
Tooley, J. & Longfield, D. 2014. The role and impact of private schools in developing countries: a response 
to DFID’s “Rigorous Literature Review”. E.G. West Centre Working Paper. 
Van der Berg, S. 2015. What the Annual National Assessments can tell us about learning deficits over the 
education system and the school career. South African Journal of Childhood Education 5(2): 28-
43. 
Wadhwa, W. 2009. Are private schools really performing better than government schools? New Delhi: 
ASER. 
Western Cape Provincial Education Act, 1997 (Act 12 of 1997). Regulations relating to the registrations of 
and subsidies to independent schools (excluding independent pre-primary schools), 6 December 
2011. Cape Town. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

29 
Appendix Table 1: Regressions of school performance in ANA Mathematics, 2012: School fees and schools resources (‘costs’)  
 
 
Western Cape primary 
Gauteng primary 
SA primary 
SA Secondary 
 
All 
Excluding 
decile 10 
Excludin
g deciles 
9 & 10 
All 
Excludin
g decile 
10 
Excludin
g deciles 
9 & 10 
All 
Excluding 
decile 10 
Excluding 
deciles 9 & 
10 
All 
Excludin
g decile 
10 
Excludi
ng 
deciles 
9 & 10 
Independe
nt dummy 
-
12.524**
* 
-6.706* 
-3.262 
2.913* 
5.000**
* 
7.472**
* 
-5.595*** 
4.562 
-19.633 
-2.58 
2.323 
-5.127 
log fee 
0.865*** 
0.866*** 
0.832**
* 
0.219**
* 
0.248**
* 
0.232**
* 
0.406*** 
0.347*** 
0.435* 
0.197*** 
0.173**
* 
0.256 
(log fees)^2 0.560*** 
0.568*** 
0.515**
* 
0.224**
* 
0.153**
* 
0.101**
* 
0.256*** 
0.253*** 
0.196 
0.092*** 
0.110** 
0.084 
Enrolment 
-
0.007*** 
-
0.007*** 
-
0.008**
* 
-
0.002** 
-
0.003** 
-0.002* 
-0.008*** 
-0.008*** 
-0.008*** 
-
0.006*** 
-
0.006**
* 
-
0.005**
* 
Urban 
1.138 
1.097 
1.514 
-1.436 
-0.912 
-0.967 
0.378 
0.641* 
0.813** 
-0.665* 
-0.743* 
-0.603 
Constant 
17.2*** 
17.0*** 
19.8*** 
27.8*** 
30.9*** 
33.1*** 
26.4*** 
26.0*** 
29.4*** 
15.3*** 
14.3*** 
15.9 
R-squared 
0.519 
0.467 
0.293 
0.253 
0.152 
0.106 
0.125 
0.038 
0.026 
0.038 
0.028 
0.02 
N 
 1 103  
 1 056  
 960  
 1 257  
 1 146  
 1 037  
 12 381  
 11 448  
 10 215  
 2 982  
 2 922  
 2 799  
F statistic 
236.413 
183.699 
78.89 
84.785 
40.798 
24.425 
353.751 
91.611 
55.178 
23.257 
17.088 
11.589 
 

30 
 
Western Cape primary 
Gauteng primary 
SA primary 
SA Secondary 
 
All 
Excluding 
decile 10 
Excludin
g deciles 
9 & 10 
All 
Excludin
g decile 
10 
Excludin
g deciles 
9 & 10 
All 
Excluding 
decile 10 
Excluding 
deciles 9 & 
10 
All 
Excludin
g decile 
10 
Excludi
ng 
deciles 
9 & 10 
Independe
nt dummy 
4.168* 
24.269**
* 
26.48**
* 
10.50**
* 
11.19**
* 
12.12**
* 
2.551** 
10.663*** 
-49.984** 
0.661 
6.329 
12.359 
log of costs 
688.71**
* 
512.579*
* 
-
155.485 
-28.196 
-2.399 
20.592 
196.456**
* 
-
1004.62**
* 
-
2567.961*
* 
74.706**
* 
-
381.950
* 
1122.97 
(log 
costs)^2 
-
32.698**
* 
-
23.271** 
12.135 
1.951* 
0.644 
-0.527 
-8.896*** 
54.345*** 
137.014** 
-3.366** 
20.515* 
-59.658 
Enrolment 
-
0.007*** 
-
0.007*** 
-
0.008**
* 
-0.002* 
-0.002* 
-0.002* 
-0.006*** 
-0.007*** 
-0.008*** 
-
0.005*** 
-
0.005**
* 
-
0.005**
* 
Urban 
2.321*** 
2.055** 
2.800**
* 
-1.212 
-0.849 
-0.891 
0.725** 
0.755** 
0.619* 
-0.733* 
-0.761* 
-0.529 
Constant 
-
3544.9**
* 
-
2722.4** 
429.1 
130.0 
2.8 
-109.9 
-
1025.4*** 
4676.7*** 
12067.7** 
-
386.5*** 
1795.9* 
-5266.3 
R-squared 
0.480 
0.444 
0.269 
0.283 
0.168 
0.119 
0.116 
0.037 
0.028 
0.035 
0.028 
0.02 
N 
 1 103  
 1 056  
 960  
 1 257  
 1 146  
 1 037  
 12 381  
 11 448  
 10 215  
 2 982  
 2 922  
 2 799  
F statistic 
202.438 
167.99 
70.165 
98.929 
45.999 
27.757 
324.962 
89.091 
57.851 
21.446 
16.765 
11.476 
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01 
