The Independent Journal of Teaching and Learning - Volume 17 (1) / 2022
Formerly The Journal of Independent Teaching and Learning
106
Motivating Grade 12 learners at
a quintile 3 secondary school in
South Africa
1 
Thaabit Ismail, Cape Peninsula University of Technology, South Africa2
Thobeka Mda, Cape Peninsula University of Technology, South Africa3
Nomakhaya Mashiyi, Cape Peninsula University of Technology, South 
Africa4
This study identiﬁes factors that motivated Grade 12 learners at a quintile 3 secondary school in post-
apartheid South Africa. A phenomenological qualitative approach was adopted. Semi-structured interviews 
were used to collect data from Grade 12 learners. Human Motivation theory and Self-determination theory 
were synthesised to form an underpinning theoretical structure. The results of the research study identiﬁed 
various factors that motivated Grade 12 learners: parental involvement, afﬁrmation, and enjoyment of 
subjects. Knowing about such factors and applying motivational interventions at schools in poor areas 
afﬁrms learners and empowers them to escape destitution, despair, cycles of illiteracy and poverty, and 
the bonds of a racist past. Teachers and parents should be cognisant of such important factors. School 
communities, particularly those in economically challenged areas, need to be made aware of the value 
of such motivating factors.1234
Keywords: extrinsic motivation, intrinsic motivation, motivation to learn, self-actualisation, self-
determination
Motivation is essential in any learning process and fundamental for academic success (Gbollie & Keamu, 
2017). Teachers, parents and the school community as a whole need to be made aware of the value 
and power of motivation as a primary means of encouraging, afﬁrming and empowering learners, and 
ultimately giving them the self-conﬁdence and skills to lift themselves out of poverty, and break free from the 
sense of worthlessness which apartheid imposed upon so many households. Well-considered motivational 
interventions initiate, enhance and sustain authentic acquisition, personal assimilation and ownership of 
new knowledge (Ghaedi & Jam, 2014). 
Researchers in South African and international contexts have identiﬁed numerous factors that can affect 
learner motivation, such as socio-economic conditions, parents, classmates, friends and teachers (Nel, 
1 
Date of submission 26 June 2020
 
Date of review outcome: 18 November 2020
 
Date of acceptance 7 January 2021
2 
ORCID: 0000-0002-8254-6888
3 
ORCID: 0000-0002-0877-7848
4 
ORCID: 0000-0001-7606-4586.
  
ABSTRACT
  
INTRODUCTION

107
The Independent Journal of Teaching and Learning - Volume 17 (1) / 2022
Formerly The Journal of Independent Teaching and Learning
2000), test anxiety, nervousness about academic evaluation, a fear of failing tests, or an unpleasant 
experience of learners in various situations (Rastegar, Akbarzadeh & Heidari, 2012). There is considerable 
uncertainty concerning which factors stimulate learners in South African schools. Since schools are 
arranged according to the income of parents, traditionally white schools have been allowed to ﬂourish 
almost as semi-private schools since liberation in 1994. Schools which were classiﬁed as non-white under 
apartheid received the lowest level of funding before 1994 and have seldom been able to escape the 
privations of that era since. South African public schools are categorised into ﬁve different groups termed 
‘quintiles’. Quintile 1 schools serve learners from the poorest parts of a province. Quintile 5 schools are 
fee-paying and serve learners from the most prosperous areas (Hall & Giese, 2008). According to Grant 
(2013), these quintiles or rankings are determined according to the poverty levels and indicators of the 
community around the school as well as certain infrastructural factors. Contrary to its liberatory intentions, 
post-apartheid government has inadvertently constructed a classist, capitalist system of schooling not 
dissimilar to the public versus comprehensive school structure in England. Instead of enabling education to 
achieve egalitarian priorities, the quintile system has entrenched privilege at quintile 5 level, and cycles of 
illiteracy and hopelessness at quintile 1-3 levels. This research project reveals motivational factors that grant 
learners the self-belief and skills to escape such cycles. The ultimate success of such initiatives lies with the 
school community, that range of concerned and committed individuals who are determined to reverse the 
deprivations of the past and deploy education as the vital means to do so. According to Horgan (2007), 
learners at disadvantaged quintile 1-3 schools are mainly motivated to ﬁnd a path to secure employment 
in order to escape the destitution with which they are familiar. Learners from advantaged schools are 
more motivated to use better education as a means to attain a high-paying professional job. This invidious 
distinction in post-apartheid South Africa has replaced racist distinctions before 1994 with a classist 
education system which enables the new multiracial rich to become wealthier while the quintile 1-3 areas 
welter in continuities of impoverishment, humiliation, unemployment, drug abuse, crime and despair.
The project noted a signiﬁcant decrease in the Grade 12 pass rate from 82% in 2015, to 79.5% in 
2016 and 62% in 2017 (DBE, 2017). This poor performance caused concern among teachers and 
management at the school. Researchers on this project sought to detect whether motivational issues of 
Grade 12 learners at this school were related to the low pass rate. At the quintile 3 secondary school 
selected for this research, it was observed that Grade 12 learners ranged from a few who worked hard 
to achieve success, to many learners who did the minimum. It was noted that in the same classroom, some 
learners were evidently highly motivated, while others were demotivated, although the learners were from 
relatively similar backgrounds. This study provides teachers, school management and parents with a better 
understanding of why learners in the same classroom are interested in learning and others not. Once 
the school and parents are made aware of these factors, appropriate strategies can be implemented to 
motivate learners to learn more readily, prevent learners from being demotivated towards their academic 
studies and enable them to succeed and reach their full potential. Little research has been conducted in the 
broader national and international context to investigate motivation of Grade 12 learners from communities 
similar to this one. This study is unique, pertinent and useful to schools, not only in the Western Cape and 
South Africa, but also to schools with similar social contexts in other developing countries outside of South 
Africa, and developed countries which manifest severe social/racial stratiﬁcation such as the UK or USA.
In order to establish what factors intrinsically or extrinsically motivate or demotivate Grade 12 learners to 
commit themselves to learn, the following research question was posed:
 
•  How do Grade 12 learners at a quintile 3 secondary school explain what motivates or demotivates 
them to learn?

108
The Independent Journal of Teaching and Learning - Volume 17 (1) / 2022
Formerly The Journal of Independent Teaching and Learning
Several national and international studies investigating motivation underline the two key types of 
motivation: namely, intrinsic and extrinsic motivation. Since the early 1970s, research has been conducted 
to determine the impact of these two main types of motivation. Researchers such as Deci (1972), Deci & 
Ryan (1980, 1985, 1991, 2000) have constantly revised the theoretical parameters and philosophical 
understandings of the terms ‘intrinsic and extrinsic motivation’ in their Self-determination theory (SDT). Unlike 
other researchers who emphasise the amount or level of motivation, Deci and Ryan (2000) concentrate 
the focus of their research upon the different types of motivation that determine motivated behaviour. Their 
research conﬁrms that the type or quality of motivation is more important than the amount of motivation for 
predicting many signiﬁcant outcomes such as ‘psychological health and well-being, effective performance, 
creative problem-solving, and deep or conceptual learning’ (Deci & Ryan, 2008: 182).
Motivation
Bakar (2014:723) asserts that motivation inﬂuences how much time and energy learners devote to learning 
and how long they will persist to complete a task. The lack of motivation, on the other hand, is an obstacle 
in learning and a reason for the decline of education standards (Awan, Noureen & Naz, 2011). When 
learners lack academic motivation or are demotivated to learn, both teaching and learning activities are 
negatively affected. A demotivated learner is generally uninterested in learning and has a strong interest 
in non-academic activities (Bannatyne, 2003). Motivation is the inborn potential power of human beings 
that energises, directs and sustains behaviour and is a trigger that transforms thoughts into action (Wang, 
2007; Ormrod, 2008). Learning cannot take place without some form of inner determination, purposeful 
commitment or motivation (Rehman & Haider, 2013). Every learner possesses some form of motivation, 
whether it is towards school activities, extramural activities, being part of a peer group or participating in 
mischievous activities. 
Motivation is fundamental to successful construction of knowledge, self-knowledge and academic 
achievement (Gbollie & Keamu, 2017). Motivating resistant, indifferent, reluctant or recalcitrant learners 
is challenging, especially in a poor area where families have submitted to hopelessness, drugs, crime, 
prostitution and social dependency. Identifying and providing motivation in such situations is a difﬁcult 
and time-consuming task that requires considerable effort (Rehman & Haider, 2013). When considering 
learners’ motivation to assimilate and own new knowledge, it is important to identify precisely the type of 
motivation they respond to best.
In their self-determination theory, Deci and Ryan (1985-2000) provide clarity on the different types of 
motivation. They distinguish between autonomous and controlled motivation. Autonomy involves acting 
voluntarily and the opportunity to experience a sense of choice (Gagné & Deci, 2005); intrinsic motivation 
is an example of autonomous motivation. On the other hand, controlled motivation involves acting under 
pressure when an individual is compelled or obliged to engage in a certain action (Hagger et al., 2014: 
566). Autonomous motivation and controlled motivation are in contrast to amotivation, which involves a 
complete lack of desire to apply effort (Howard et al., 2016).
Autonomous motivation
Intrinsic motivation is a form of autonomous motivation which is considered by Ryan and Deci (2000) to 
be the highest and ideal type of motivation. Ryan and Deci (2000: 56) note that ‘intrinsic motivation is the 
doing of an activity for its inherent satisfaction, for the fun or challenge entailed, rather than because of 
external pushes, pressures, or rewards’. In a school context, intrinsically motivated behaviour is manifested 
when learners are motivated to learn on their own, without external rewards or prompts, and gain pleasure 
and satisfaction from their performance (Deci et al., 1991; Deci, Olafsen & Ryan, 2017). High-quality 
learning and creativity are a result of intrinsic motivation (Ryan & Deci, 2000) because learners are ready 
  
LITERATURE REVIEW

109
The Independent Journal of Teaching and Learning - Volume 17 (1) / 2022
Formerly The Journal of Independent Teaching and Learning
to own, acquire and re-formulate knowledge out of a spontaneous enthusiasm and hunger for it. Working 
with intrinsically motivated learners is an ideal experience for teachers because they are so enthused 
about their area of interest that they do not need to be disciplined or watched. For them, the work itself is 
rewarding and they derive pleasure and a sense of satisfaction from working on a task (Davids, 2010).
Controlled motivation
Extrinsic motivation is a form of controlled motivation which, in contrast to intrinsic motivation, is not 
performed out of interest but because learners are encouraged towards some separable consequence 
(Deci et al., 2017). Tasks or activities are performed because of an instrumental value and not because it 
is interesting and enjoyable: ‘The extrinsically motivated student normally wants the good grades, money, 
or recognition that particular activities and accomplishments bring’ (Ford & Roby, 2013: 102). Teachers 
do not always comprehend the importance of extrinsic motivation: many teachers perceive extrinsic 
motivation as a reward for good behaviour and punishment as the correct penalty for bad behaviour. 
Ryan and Deci (2000) argue that although extrinsic motivation is understood as a weaker type of 
motivation, it is essential for teachers who cannot always rely upon intrinsic motivation to develop 
extrinsic motivational teaching strategies. Many of the tasks that teachers want their students to perform 
are not intrinsically interesting or enjoyable. When learners perceive a task to be uninteresting, difﬁcult 
or irrelevant, they may neglect to engage with or complete the task or become academically disengaged 
(Legault, Green-Demers & Pelletier, 2006). 
Conceptual Framework
This study made use of two theories: Maslow’s (1943-1954) theory of human motivation as well as 
Deci and Ryan’s (1985, 2000) self-determination theory (SDT). These two theories intertwine as both 
explore human motivation and the role played by human needs in motivation. Maslow’s theory of human 
motivation places human needs in a ﬁve-level hierarchy that humans strive to satisfy; one level leading up 
to the next in a pyramidal structure of attainment and personal fulﬁlment. Maslow describes the different 
needs learners are motivated to satisfy in order to reach the ultimate goal of self-actualisation: physiological 
needs, safety, love and belongingness, and esteem.
Figure 1:
Hierarchy of needs (Maslow, 1954)
 
Self-
actualisation
Esteem
Love and
belongingness
Safety
Physiological

110
The Independent Journal of Teaching and Learning - Volume 17 (1) / 2022
Formerly The Journal of Independent Teaching and Learning
According to Maslow (1943; 1954; 1970), to be motivated towards achieving at your full potential, 
these needs must ﬁrst be satisﬁed. This theory was used to establish a link between the motivational needs 
described by Maslow and what learners explain as their motivation to learn, to determine what needs in 
the hierarchy learners have difﬁculty satisfying, and how these motivational needs affect their motivation 
to learn. For learners to commit themselves to achievement, they need to take the initial steps to succeed 
academically and to try to achieve status within the esteem needs. They need to have satisﬁed their 
fundamental physiological needs, safety needs and their yearning for love and belonging. The ideal is for 
learners to reach and satisfy the need for self-actualisation so that they are able to realise their potential 
and achieve to the best of their abilities. This observation links with the theory of Deci and Ryan (1985, 
2000) regarding the psychological needs that learners will be motivated to satisfy in order to gain self-
determination in their academic work. The concern of the theory is the inherent motivation of human 
beings and how humans internalise motivation to become self-determined. 
Deci and Ryan (1985, 2000) focus on two different types of motivation: intrinsic and extrinsic motivation. 
These types, largely determine the origin of behaviour towards academic activities. The theory 
considers these two types of motivation as a continuum that extends from extrinsic to intrinsic motivation. 
Motivation towards a task becomes an embedded part of the learner’s psyche. This belief is described as 
internalisation and it deﬁnes how an individual’s deepest motivation or behaviour can range from being 
unwilling (amotivation) to compliant through external means (passive compliance), to active personal 
commitment (Ryan & Deci, 2000). The SDT suggests three basic psychological needs that are innate 
in humans: competence, relatedness, and autonomy. In order to facilitate the internalisation process, 
these needs should be relatively satisﬁed. Competence involves the need to feel effective and capable of 
attaining various outcomes in a given situation (Legault, 2017). Learners have the need to feel competent 
when engaging with others. Relatedness involves the need to connect and develop secure and satisfying 
relations with others (Legault, 2017). Autonomy refers to taking responsibility for one’s own actions. 
Learners need a sense of control over their learning and want to engage in learning activities of their own 
volition and enthusiasm for the knowledge area. All these needs interact with one another and constitute 
self-determination. The SDT helps to understand what basic psychological needs learners have to satisfy 
to gain intrinsic motivation.
Four types of extrinsic motivation emanate from the self-determination theory which results from the 
internalisation process: External regulation, Introjected regulation, Identiﬁed regulation and Integrated 
regulation. These types of extrinsic motivation exhibit the degree to which autonomy is experienced by 
learners. They range from External regulation which is considered the least self-determined and determining 
type of extrinsic motivation, to Integrated regulation, the most autonomous form of extrinsic motivation, 
since the regulatory process is completely integrated with the learner’s sense of self (Ryan & Deci, 2000). 
When the regulatory processes are integrated, the behaviour is an expression of who the person is, what 
is important to, and valued by, the individual. Learners perform tasks willingly and of their own because 
the work is important to them. 
This study is set within an interpretive paradigm. An interpretive paradigm allows the researcher more scope 
to investigate issues that inﬂuence and characterise academic motivation; to gain a better understanding 
of factors affecting Grade 12 learners’ motivation to learn. This study adopted a phenomenological design 
and deployed a strictly deﬁned and adapted type of qualitative research methodology, and applied 
recognised qualitative methods to collect data. Qualitative research seeks to establish how individuals 
make sense of, or interpret, phenomena in order to understand the social reality of individuals (Mohajan, 
2018). Phenomenological studies are concerned with describing in-depth understandings and meanings 
of individuals’ lived experiences about certain phenomena (Creswell, 2013).
  
METHODOLOGY

111
The Independent Journal of Teaching and Learning - Volume 17 (1) / 2022
Formerly The Journal of Independent Teaching and Learning
A purposive sampling method was used to select the sample for the interviews. Purposive sampling is the 
process by which a researcher purposefully selects a sample, based upon its characteristics (Pascoe, 2014). 
This sampling method was chosen as the most appropriate method because it allowed the researchers to 
include a variety of participants based upon certain characteristics representative of the population. A 
sample of 10 Grade 12 learners was selected: ﬁve male learners, and ﬁve females. These learners ranged 
from 17 to 18 years of age. In this speciﬁc year, all Grade 12 learners were Coloured learners. 
The learners for the sample were identiﬁed from a pilot study the main researcher conducted, to gain a 
social and academic proﬁle of the Grade 12 learners. Participant learners were selected to capture a 
fairly diverse academic and social background proﬁle, and the result was 10 learners with the following 
characteristics: 
 
•  One learner was selected because this learner was the top Grade 12 learner at the school and lived 
with a single parent in low socio-economic conditions. 
 
•  One learner lived in the school’s student residence and maintained a relatively high academic 
performance. 
 
•  One learner was selected based upon high academic performance and because the learner lived 
with a single parent. 
 
•  One learner lived in a neighbouring town with both parents in relatively good socio-economic 
conditions but performed below average. 
 
•  One learner lived with both parents in relatively good socio-economic conditions but performed 
below average. 
 
•  Three learners were selected who performed at an average level and lived in low socio-economic 
conditions with their grandparents. 
 
•  Two learners were selected who performed at an average level and were drawn from a low to 
middle class socio-economic background. 
Six Grade 12 teachers and three school management team (SMT) members were selected to provide 
insight into teachers’ and management’s understanding of Grade 12 learners’ academic motivation, and 
factors that motivate or demotivate learners to learn at this school. The SMT members included the principal 
and the two deputy principals who are also Grade 12 teachers. The remainder of the six teachers in the 
sample were selected based upon their teaching experience and the different subjects they teach.
The use of a small, carefully selected sample allowed the researcher to devote more time to participants, so 
as to excavate the contextual situations that affect learner motivation identiﬁed by participants, such as the 
home, the classroom, teachers, poverty, hunger, lack of computer access or a place to study undisturbed. 
This study is concerned with the motivation of Grade 12 learners and seeks to explore factors affecting 
their motivation to learn. 
The study was conducted using semi-structured interviews with open-ended questions for all learners. 
This interview method allowed the researchers to probe questions and dig more deeply into learners’ 
responses, to gain a better understanding of factors that motivate or demotivate learners to learn at a 
quintile 3 secondary school. The researchers ensured that all the questions were answered by elaborating 
upon questions or rephrasing questions to ensure that the participants understood the questions and to 
eliminate potential bias answers. The interview schedule was arranged, starting with questions pertaining 
to learners’ backgrounds, to deeper questions relating to personal issues affecting motivation at their home 
and school environment. All learners were interviewed using the same interview schedule as a guide. 
Teachers and SMT members were interviewed through a Focus Group. 

112
The Independent Journal of Teaching and Learning - Volume 17 (1) / 2022
Formerly The Journal of Independent Teaching and Learning
Qualitative researchers choose the concepts ‘trustworthiness’, ‘rigour’ and ‘quality’ in the qualitative 
paradigm to establish validity and reliability which are associated with quantitative research. Trustworthiness 
can be achieved by ensuring the credibility, transferability, dependability and conﬁrmability of the study 
(Gunawan, 2015). Credibility refers to how accurately the researcher interprets the data provided by 
participants (Koonin, 2014). This credibility indicates whether results of the study are believable from 
the perspective of the participants in the research. Credibility was ensured by collecting data that were 
relevant to the research questions. Participants were made to feel at ease during the interview process 
and were ensured that they were free to express themselves in total conﬁdentiality; so that the data truly 
reﬂected their opinions and feelings. To further ensure credibility of the ﬁndings, the researchers applied 
the use of source triangulation which involves reliance upon various informants so as to verify individual 
opinions and experiences against others (Shenton, 2004). In this study, source triangulation was achieved 
by interviewing learners, teachers and the SMT. Data collection methods were triangulated by conducting 
individual interviews with Grade 12 learners and a focus group interview with Grade 12 teachers and the 
SMT. This process allowed the researcher to construct a rich overview and understanding of the attitudes, 
needs and behaviours relating to learners’ academic motivation, based upon the contributions of various 
participants.
The researchers ensured construct validity by virtue of having spent enough time in the context of the 
participants and respecting the context of the study. The researchers were sufﬁciently steeped in the 
culture, mores and language of the school community. It was therefore possible to detect nuances in the 
language, as well as to comprehend the signiﬁcances of what was not stated overtly. As the researchers 
were familiar with the participants’ various learning proﬁles and circumstances generally, they were 
able to interpret facial and bodily expressions when learners responded to sensitive questions and the 
researchers were able to adapt questions quickly to avoid any discomfort, awkwardness or pain which 
the questions might otherwise have caused. 
Transferability and dependability were enhanced by providing thick descriptions of the research design, 
data collection methods and procedures. According to Pitney (2004), dependability is based upon the 
question of whether the ﬁndings are reasonable, based on the data collected and not whether similar 
ﬁndings can be reproduced by another researcher. 
To ensure conﬁrmability, the researcher made sure that the ﬁndings objectively represent the results of the 
explanations and experiences of participants, and not the preference of the researcher. When reporting 
upon the data, the researcher included interviewees’ actual words. Data from different sources were 
triangulated to conﬁrm the responses of participants.
Ethical considerations were adhered to. Permission was granted by the Western Cape Education 
Department to conduct the research at the secondary school. All participants were informed regarding 
the purpose of the study, the value of their contribution, how the ﬁndings were to be used and their 
contribution to the ﬁeld of knowledge. Details of learners were provided by the school with the assurance 
that all information would be kept conﬁdential. All participants were informed that their details and the 
information provided would remain conﬁdential, and anonymity was maintained throughout the study. 
Participants signed a consent form agreeing to participate in the study voluntarily without any rewards. 
Participants under 18 were given a consent form to be completed and signed by them and their parents 
or guardians to grant permission to participate in the study. All participants were made aware of their 
right to withdraw from the study at any time, or withdraw any data provided by them if they so wished.
Data were analysed using an inductive content analysis approach which indicated that the researchers 
garner raw data and allows themes to emerge, without attempting to ﬁt the data to suit a preconceived 

113
The Independent Journal of Teaching and Learning - Volume 17 (1) / 2022
Formerly The Journal of Independent Teaching and Learning
conceptual framework (Bezuidenhout & Cronje, 2014). The inductive approach allowed the researchers 
to include all key themes that emerged from the data. An open coding method was used to identify the 
themes. The researchers examined several transcripts in detail, identiﬁed common data and created codes 
to link these related patterns in the data. Atlas.ti version 7 was used as a tool to identify the themes and 
patterns, and created codes using the build in coding function. The conclusion provided the researchers 
with insight into motivation of learners under similar conditions or backgrounds. 
Four themes were identiﬁed in the analysis of the data collected from participants, namely: breaking 
the cycle of poverty, parental involvement, acknowledgement, and enjoyment of subjects. These themes 
are presented with reference to the actual responses of the participants. The literature and conceptual 
framework were linked to the ﬁndings in order to discuss and interpret the themes. Although ﬁndings from 
this study cannot be generalised, they can be related to other learners with similar conditions.
Breaking the Cycle of Poverty
The learners responded that the poor socio-economic conditions at home inﬂuenced their motivation to 
learn. Some learners responded that the living conditions at home demotivated them to learn. They lived 
in relatively small houses along with many family members that included young siblings and at times 
members of the extended family. Consequently, ﬁnding a place where learners could learn and study in 
silence was seldom possible. One learner mentioned, 
 
 Our house is very small and my siblings are very active in the house during the day when I want to 
study.
Another learner remarked, 
 
I study late at night when everybody is asleep, then the next day I’m tired and unproductive at school.
Many breadwinners were single mothers or grandparents who struggled to make ends meet. These 
breadwinners often had to provide for the entire extended household and at times struggled to put food 
on the table. Learners often experienced difﬁculty learning on an empty stomach. A learner noted, 
 
I come to school hungry and then cannot focus in class…I hear the words, but nothing goes in.
A few learners remarked that hardship and social deprivation motivated them to work harder at school in 
order to get out of their current living conditions. One learner stated, 
 
 Seeing how hard my mother as a single parent works to look after me makes me want to work harder 
so that I can give her a better life. 
Another learner mentioned, 
 
 I work as hard as possible to get good marks so that I can get out of the conditions that we live in. I 
don’t have to live in these conditions for the rest of my life.
It is evident from the responses that some Grade 12 learners attended school on an empty stomach due 
to lack of food at home. When learners sit in class craving food, they struggle to focus and become 
demotivated to learn. To address this challenge, the Department of Basic Education (DBE) developed a 
National School Nutrition Program to provide learners with meals from the school feeding scheme at 
  
FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION

114
The Independent Journal of Teaching and Learning - Volume 17 (1) / 2022
Formerly The Journal of Independent Teaching and Learning
quintile 1-3 schools (Munje & Jita, 2019). Similarly, systems have been put into place in the UK to provide 
meals to learners from low-income families (World Food Programme, 2013). This predicament is thus not 
unique to South Africa. Munje and Jita (2019) note that too often in SA schools, meals are not available 
at the scheduled time and this results in an increase in learner anxiety and hinders concentration and 
learning abilities. 
Learners struggled to study at home during the day due to various distractions and had to catch up with 
their studies at night; consequently, learners often lacked sufﬁcient sleep. These learners were frequently 
exhausted or sleepy in class, which resulted in them being demotivated to learn at school. They were, in 
many cases, more motivated to satisfy the need to sleep than to learn. Such learners struggled to focus 
on any learning, which in that situation was not a priority for them. In line with Maslow’s theory, it is 
evident that the lack of basic needs such as food and adequate sleep emanated from the data as reasons 
for learners’ demotivation. These needs, according to Maslow, have to be satisﬁed ﬁrst before learners 
can be motivated towards higher planes of existential signiﬁcance. It can, therefore, be inferred that 
learners who have satisﬁed their physiological needs are more likely to be motivated to learn than their 
counterparts who are struggling to satisfy their physiological needs. Learners from poor households are 
limited from functioning at higher levels because they are forced by poverty to devote their time struggling 
to satisfy physiological and safety needs, leaving them little time or energy to develop self-respect or their 
own potential (Dos Reis, 2007). These negative and demoralising factors render it difﬁcult for learners to 
fulﬁl their goal of escaping the degrading cycle of historically imposed poverty, exploitation and hardship.
Living under these difﬁcult and unjust socio-economic conditions, one might expect learners to be universally 
demotivated to learn. Instead, the data revealed that Grade 12 learners were in many instances motivated 
by these very conditions to learn at school as a means of escaping degradation, suffering and humiliations; 
in order to live a better life in the future. This observation of learners’ positive reaction to destitution is in line 
with the ﬁndings of a study by Igwe (2017) which reveals that learners are frequently motivated to achieve 
academically in order to free themselves from the conﬁnes and sufferings of poverty. Identiﬁed regulation 
as a form of extrinsic motivation, according to the SDT, was most relevant in these situations. Learners 
accept the regulatory process as their own and begin to value the consequences and signiﬁcance of their 
own behaviour (Ryan & Deci, 2000). Though some learners were found to become demotivated, others 
became motivated by similar conditions. In line with the SDT, these motivated learners have identiﬁed the 
value and personal importance of learning for them. They realised that studying at school was the only 
viable and realistic hope of avoiding the hardships of their parents’ lives and of escaping from their own 
crowded and poor living conditions.
Parental Involvement 
The majority of the learners indicated that they were motivated to learn by parents who were involved in 
their academic activities; by checking homework, attending parent-teacher meetings and enquiring about 
their academic performance from teachers. A learner remarked, 
 
My mother and grandmother will ask me every day if I have schoolwork. 
Learners revealed that they were motivated by their family; supporting them in their education and going 
out of their way to provide them with the necessary facilities that they needed to learn. A learner mentioned, 
 
It motivates me to know that my mother would do anything for me when it comes to my schoolwork. 
Another learner concurred, 
 
…they will never think twice to buy things I need for school. 

115
The Independent Journal of Teaching and Learning - Volume 17 (1) / 2022
Formerly The Journal of Independent Teaching and Learning
On the other hand, lack of parental involvement was perceived by many learners in this study to be a lack 
of care, concern and support from parents who seemed uninterested in their schoolwork. Parent apathy 
was found to demotivate learners to learn; that is within the parameters of this selected study. A learner 
attested, 
 
nobody checks my homework or worries about my schoolwork. 
One might have expected that learners preferred to be left alone to work on their own and take responsibility 
for their own work, but the opposite emerged from the data. Learners desired to learn in a controlled 
environment and became demotivated when nobody checked their homework or when nobody enquired 
about their progress or activities at school. Usher and Kober (2012: 4) agree that learners develop 
‘feelings of competence, control, curiosity, and positive attitudes about academics’ when parents create 
an environment at home that motivates learning and remain actively involved in their children’s education. 
Seemingly, if parents are concerned about learners’ schoolwork, it is an indication to learners that they are 
interested and concerned about their future. Parental concern could thus be cited as a motivating factor. 
From the participants’ remarks, it is clear that learners were motivated to learn when their parents were 
involved in their schoolwork. This involvement includes physically helping learners with homework, 
attending school functions, encouraging them to learn and providing positive feedback. When parents or 
guardians were involved in learners’ academic and social lives, learners perceived them as interested, 
and concerned for their future and tended to adopt similar concerns and commitment to study. Learners 
feel connected to their parents and guardians and experience a sense of belonging. These acts of love, 
care and involvement contribute to the satisfaction of the need for relatedness according to the SDT. This 
stems from satisfying the love and belonging needs according to Maslow. Relatedness is one of the needs 
that facilitate the internalisation process, in addition to the autonomy and competence needs (Niemiec & 
Ryan, 2009). In line with Niemiec and Ryan’s study, these learners are inclined towards identiﬁed and 
integrated regulation. They were motivated to learn on their own because they had identiﬁed the value 
of learning. The value of learning for these learners was a means of showing appreciation and love to 
their caregivers. They were therefore motivated to return the love and care by making their parents or 
guardians proud through learning in order to achieve academically. Although this is a form of controlled 
motivation, it is relatively self-determined because learners do it willingly, even if partially for personal 
reasons. Such action towards the acquisition of knowledge is more authentic and self-fulﬁlling than action 
driven by the threat of punishment or the lure of reward. However, these learners have not completely 
integrated the regulation of their motivation. There is a possibility that if their parents neglect to show 
interest and care for their academic work, they might become demotivated and would require external 
regulation to motivate them to learn. 
Acknowledgement
Learners mentioned that receiving positive feedback, rewards and being recognised for their performance 
motivates them to learn and maintain high academic performance. Prizegiving (diploma evenings) was 
one of the factors highlighted by the majority of the learners as motivation to learn. One learner mentioned, 
 
 Just to receive a certiﬁcate for good performance and being able to show everybody at home motivates 
me again to do better and to get a certiﬁcate again. 
On the other hand, when learners were not acknowledged for their hard work and performance, they 
became demotivated to learn. A learner revealed, 
 
 I put in so much and I feel that I’ve done well, but when I get home my mother will say I could’ve done 
better. 

116
The Independent Journal of Teaching and Learning - Volume 17 (1) / 2022
Formerly The Journal of Independent Teaching and Learning
Another learner mentioned, 
 
My father will never tell me he is proud of me.  
 
From the participants’ views, one can establish an important link between acknowledgement, and the 
motivation to learn and achieve. The data revealed that many learners were motivated to learn in order 
to gain an external reward and recognition for their performance by peers, parents or teachers. Learners 
craved recognition; they wished others to regard them as intelligent and hardworking. This craving is 
aligned strongly with Maslow’s (1954) theory of human needs: learners, in their effort to satisfy their 
needs for esteem and social recognition, desire reputation, status, attention, importance or appreciation. 
Learners want to be acknowledged for their efforts to gain status and respect in the eyes of those in their 
family, learning or work environment and society at large. This impulse was evident from observing 
that learners who receive recognition and who gained a reputation for good performance, were further 
motivated to learn in order to uphold and increase their standing in the community. In agreement with the 
SDT, competency needs play an important role in the motivation of these learners. The SDT suggests that 
learners desire to be seen by others as competent and want to feel competent when engaging with other 
learners. These learners experience a sense of competence when they are acknowledged by others for 
their good performance. When they satisfy their need for competence, they are likely to internalise their 
motivation, learn out of their own volition and exhibit attributes of self-determination.
A corollary to this point was that data from this study indicated that learners whose efforts were not 
recognised at home often became demotivated to learn. In terms of Maslow’s theory, these learners 
experienced difﬁculty satisfying their need for esteem. To satisfy this need, learners selected for this 
investigation at a quintile 3 semi-rural school often resorted to seeking attention and recognition in less 
orthodox, non-academic or even undesirable areas; further diverting their focus away from a ladder of 
achievement and steady progress in learning. It is therefore evident from the responses that learners who 
are acknowledged for their achievements are more motivated to learn than those who do not receive the 
necessary acknowledgement.
Enjoyment of subjects
A few of the learners reported that they were motivated in subjects that they enjoyed and found interesting. 
A learner commented, 
 
I’m motivated in Physical science, because this is one of the subjects I enjoy. 
Another learner had a similar response, 
 
I love computers; I ﬁnd the subject interesting. 
One learner highlighted, 
 
Afrikaans I would learn on my own, not because I have to, but because I enjoy it.
Another learner mentioned, 
 
 I like challenging problems. I enjoy struggling with a difﬁcult problem so that when I solve it I feel proud 
of myself and that motivates me to continue trying. 
On the other hand, when learners did not enjoy the subject, they became demotivated in the subject. A 
learner made the following comment: 

117
The Independent Journal of Teaching and Learning - Volume 17 (1) / 2022
Formerly The Journal of Independent Teaching and Learning
 
I feel like I have to force myself to study Life Sciences because I don’t really enjoy learning this.
It is clear from the responses that when learners found subjects interesting and enjoyable, they were 
more motivated to learn and study for subjects; of their own volition and enthusiasm for new knowledge. 
Schukajlow and Krug (2014) note that ﬁnding connections with a subject or building up an interest in one 
area is key for sparking and sustaining a learner’s short-term and possibly long-term love of a particular 
area of knowledge. Finding such a connection and spark of enthusiasm for one particular area or point 
of fascination is strongly linked to academic achievement. In line with the SDT, the study found a link 
between the enjoyment of subjects, the needs for competence and autonomy and learners’ motivation to 
learn. When learners ﬁnd subjects interesting and enjoyable, they tend to work harder to understand the 
work and feel proud of themselves when completing a difﬁcult task. They, therefore, exhibit a sense of 
satisfaction towards their need for competence. These learners feel competent when engaging with the 
work and with others and attempt more challenging tasks, because they believe in their abilities to master 
the work. 
When learners enjoy the work, they develop a sense of autonomy. In this instance, they take responsibility 
for their own actions and do not need a controlled regulation, since they will learn on their own because 
they enjoy what they are doing and ﬁnd interest in acquiring knowledge. It is apparent that these learners 
have relatively satisﬁed the needs for competence and autonomy, which is essential in facilitating the 
internalisation of their motivation to learn. These learners learned because they were authentically driven 
by a passionate interest in a certain subject - they enjoyed learning new content, persisted until they 
understood the challenging content, and wanted to ﬁgure out solutions for challenging problems on their 
own. This pattern of knowledge acquisition is aligned with ﬁndings from a study conducted by Singh 
(2011) who claims that intrinsically motivated learners enjoy challenges, and do not readily give up 
when facing challenges; they are likely to persist and complete assigned tasks. From the ﬁndings of this 
investigation, it may be implied that in conﬁrmation of the SDT, these learners were intrinsically motivated.
Motivation, whether controlled or autonomous, is undoubtedly a crucial part of learning and academic 
success. This study found that learners from impoverished households, who have managed to satisfy their 
basic needs, were motivated to learn as a means to escape their harsh living conditions and achieve a 
better future. The study further revealed that when learners were acknowledged for academic achievements, 
they became more motivated to learn to continue receiving these acknowledgements. When parents were 
involved in learners’ schoolwork, learners became motivated to learn to make their parents proud as a 
means of returning the love and care they perceived when parents were involved in their studies. Learners 
who found enjoyment in subjects often learned from their own volition because they enjoyed the work, 
found the work interesting and wanted to increase their knowledge.
The compelling factor that emerged from the ﬁndings was that these motivating factors allowed learners 
to identify the purpose and beneﬁt of learning for them; whether it was working towards a better future 
to please their parents, gain recognition, or internal satisfaction. Once they understood why they had 
to learn, they often appreciated the value of learning. Learners should thus be encouraged to set goals 
that are relevant to their circumstances and interest so that they can comprehend the greater purpose of 
learning for their future. Parental involvement and academic acknowledgement should be encouraged as 
it adds intrinsic value to learning. Learners must be provided opportunities to be acknowledged for their 
academic abilities, to be seen as competent, and to be valued by others. Teachers and parents should 
be cognisant of factors that contribute to learner motivation and need to provide clarity and indicate to 
learners, in the classroom and at home, how learning would add value to aspects of their lives which 
coincide with their life goals. 
  
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION

118
The Independent Journal of Teaching and Learning - Volume 17 (1) / 2022
Formerly The Journal of Independent Teaching and Learning
Awan, R., Noureen, G. & Naz, A. (2011) A Study of Relationship between Achievement Motivation, Self 
concept and Achievement in English and Mathematics at Secondary level. International Education Studies 
4(3) pp.72-78.
Bakar, R. (2014) The effect of learning motivation on student’s productive competencies in vocational high 
school, West Sumatra. International Journal of Asian Social Science 4(6) pp.722-732.
Bannatyne, A. (2003) Student characteristics. http://www.bannatynereadingprogram.com/BP13CHAR.
htm (Accessed 07 July 2015).
Bezuidenhout, R. & Cronje, F. (2014) Qualitative data analysis. In F. Du Plooy-Cilliers, C. Davis & R. 
Bezuidenhout (Eds.) Research matters. Cape Town: Juta.
Creswell, J.W. (2013) Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among ﬁve approaches. 3rd 
ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Davids, R. (2010) Practices which contribute towards grade 6 learners’ reading motivation (Unpublished 
master's dissertation). Cape Peninsula University of Technology, Mowbray, South Africa.
Deci, E.L. & Ryan, R.M. (1985) Intrinsic motivation and self-determination in human behavior. New York: 
Plenum.
Deci, E.L. & Ryan, R. M. (2008) Self-Determination Theory: A Macrotheory of Human Motivation, 
Development, and Health. Canadian Psychology 49(3) pp.182-185.
Deci, E.L., Olafsen, A.H. & Ryan, R.M. (2017) Self-determination theory in work organizations: The state 
of a science. Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and Organizational Behavior 4(1) pp.19-43.
Deci, E.L., Vallerand, R.J., Pelletier, L.G. & Ryan, R.M. (1991) Motivation and Education: The Self-
Determination Perspective. Educational Psychologist 26(3 & 4) pp.325-346. 
Department of Basic Education. (2017) The 2017 National Senior Certiﬁcate Schools Performance Report. 
Pretoria: Government Printer.
Dos Reis, K.M. (2007) The inﬂuence of gangsterism on the morale of educators on the Cape Flats, Western 
Cape (Unpublished master's dissertation). Cape Peninsula University of Technology, Cape Town, South 
Africa.
Ford, V.B. & Roby, D.E. (2013) Why do high school students lack motivation in the classroom? Global 
Education Journal 2013(2) pp.101-113.
Gagné, M. & Deci, E.L. (2005) Self-determination theory and work motivation. Journal of Organizational 
Behavior 26 pp.331-362.
Gbollie, C. & Keamu, H.P. (2017) Student Academic Performance: The Role of Motivation, Strategies, 
and Perceived Factors Hindering Liberian Junior and Senior High School Students Learning. Education 
Research International 2017 pp.1-11.
  
REFERENCES

119
The Independent Journal of Teaching and Learning - Volume 17 (1) / 2022
Formerly The Journal of Independent Teaching and Learning
Grant, D. (2013) Background to the national quintile system. http://wced.pgwc.gov.za/comms/
press/2013/74_14oct.html (Accessed 7 September 2016).
Gunawan J. (2015) Ensuring Trustworthiness in Qualitative Research. Belitung Nursing Journal 1(1) 
pp.10-11.
Hall, K. & Giese, S. (2008) Addressing quality through school fees and school funding. In S. Pendlebury, 
L. Lake, & C. Smith (Eds.) South African child gauge 2008/2009 pp.35-40. Cape Town: Children’s 
Institute, UCT.
Hagger, M.S., Hardcastle, S.J., Chater, A., Mallett, C., Pal, S. & Chatzisarantis, N.L.D. (2014) 
Autonomous and controlled motivational regulations for multiple health-related behaviors: between- and 
within-participants analyses. Health Psychology & Behavioural Medicine 2(1) pp.565-601.
Horgan, G. (2007) The Impact of Poverty on Young Children’s Experience of School, York: Joseph 
Rowntree Foundation.
Howard, J., Gagné, M., Morin, A.J. & Van den Broeck, A. (2016) Motivation proﬁles at work: A self-
determination theory approach. Journal of Vocational Behavior 95 pp.74-89.
Igwe, I.O. (2017) Inﬂuence of socio-economic status of parents’ income and motivation on the academic 
achievement of chemistry students. International Journal of Current Research 9(4) pp.49627-49633.
Klatte, M., Bergström, K. & Lachmann, T. (2013) Does noise affect learning? A short review of noise effects 
on cognitive performance. Frontiers in psychology 4(578) pp.1-6, doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00578
Koonin, M. (2014) Validity and Reliability. In F. Du Plooy-Cilliers, C. Davis & R. Bezuidenhout (Eds.) 
Research matters. Cape Town: Juta.
Legault, L., Green-Demers, I. & Pelletier, L. (2006) Why do high school students lack motivation in the 
classroom? Toward an understanding of academic amotivation and the role of social support. Journal of 
Educational Psychology 98(3) pp.567–582.
Legault, L. (2017) Self-determination theory. In V. Zeigler-Hill & T.K. Shackelford (Eds.) Encyclopedia of 
Personality and Individual Differences pp.1-9. New York: Springer.
Maslow, A.H. (1943) A theory of human motivation. Psychological Review 50(4) pp.370-396.
Maslow, A.H. (1954) Motivation and Personality. (3rd ed.) New York: Harper & Row.
Maslow, A.H. (1970) Motivation and Personality. (2nd ed.) New York: Harper & Row.
Mohajan, H.K. (2018) Qualitative research methodology in social sciences and related subjects. Journal 
of Economic Development, Environment and People 7(1) pp.23-48.
Munje, P. & Jita, L. (2019) The implementation of the school feeding scheme (SFS) in South African Public 
primary schools. Educational Practice and Theory 41(2) pp.25-42.
Nel, W.N. (2000) Faktore wat verband hou met die leermotivering en leerhouding van leerders in 
sekondêre skole in die Upington omgewing. (Unpublished master's dissertation). University of South 
Africa, Pretoria, South Africa.

120
The Independent Journal of Teaching and Learning - Volume 17 (1) / 2022
Formerly The Journal of Independent Teaching and Learning
Niemiec, C.P. & Ryan, R.M. (2009) Autonomy, competence, and relatedness in the classroom: Applying 
self-determination theory to educational practice. Theory and Research in Education 7(2) pp.133–144.
Ormrod, J.E. (2008) Educational psychology: Developing learners. 6th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Pearson Education.
Pascoe, G. (2014) Sampling. In F. Du Plooy-Cilliers, C. Davis & R. Bezuidenhout (Eds.) Research matters. 
Cape Town: Juta.
Pitney, W.A. (2004) Strategies for Establishing Trustworthiness in Qualitative Research. Athletic Therapy 
Today 9(1) pp.26-28, January.
Rastegar, M., Akbarzadeh, M. & Heidari, N. (2012) The Darker Side of Motivation: Demotivation and 
Its Relation with Two Variables of Anxiety among Iranian EFL Learners. International Scholarly Research 
Network 2012 pp.1-8.
Rehman, A. & Haider, K. (2013) The impact of motivation on learning of secondary school students in 
Karachi: An analytical study. Educational Research International 2(2) pp.139-147.
Ryan, R.M. & Deci, E.L. (2000) Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivations: Classic Deﬁnitions and New Directions. 
Contemporary Educational Psychology 25 pp.54-67.
Schukajlow, S. & Krug, A. (2014) Are interest and enjoyment important for students’ performance? In C. 
Nicol, S. Oesterle, P. Liljedahl & D. Allan (Eds.) Proceedings of the Joint Meeting of PME 38 and PME-NA 
36. 5th ed. Vancouver, Canada: PME.
Shenton, A.K. (2004) Strategies for ensuring trustworthiness in qualitative research projects. Education for 
Information 22 pp.63-75. January 6.
Singh, K. (2011) Study of Achievement Motivation in Relation to Academic Achievement of Students. 
International Journal of Educational Planning & Administration 1(2) pp.161-171.
Usher, A. & Kober, N. (2012) Student Motivation - An Overlooked Piece of School Reform. Center on 
Education Policy. Washington: The George Washington University.
Wang, Y. (2007) On the cognitive processes of human perception with emotions, motivations, and 
attitudes. International Journal of Cognitive Informatics and Natural Intelligence 1(4) pp.1-13.
World Food Program. (2013) State of School Feeding Worldwide. https://www.hst.org.za/publications/
NonHST%20Publications/wfp257481.pdf (Accessed 01 February 2021).
